## Abstract

Many optoelectronic devices , such as solar cells and LEDs, require materials that possess both transparency and conductivity. Indium tin oxide (ITO), the most commonly used transparent conductor , is limited to flat thin films and, therefore, cannot be used in 3D electronics. Herein, we present the fabrication of complex 3D ITO structures at sub-micron resolution via multiphoton absorption polymerization (MAP), a vat photopolymerization technology, by combining sol-gel chemistry and radical polymerization . Following the MAP fabrication, heat treatment is applied to convert the gel into a ceramic ITO. The sintering temperature affects the porosity, electrical conductivity , and transparency of the printed ITO structures. Electrical conductivity was measured for printed objects sintered at temperatures starting at 700 °C up to 1150 °C with a maximum bulk conductivity of 14.47 ± 1.54 S/cm at 1000 °C and maximal transparency above 90 %. Enabling the fabrication of full 3D conductive ITO micro-structures via MAP, this work unlocks new possibilities and perspectives for the fabrication of 3D optoelectronic devices with transparent and conductive components.

## 1. Introduction

Combining conductivity and transparency in a single material is important in several fields, including optoelectronics and green energy devices. The prevailing transparent electrodes rely mainly on thin layers of conductive oxides (TCOs) deposited on plastics or glass. TCOs are highly doped oxide ceramic materials characterized by high transparency to visible light, low electrical resistivity, high chemical resistance, high-temperature durability, and stability to mechanical wear . One of the most common TCOs is indium tin oxide (ITO), which has been utilized in the industry for over 30 years. ITO has been employed in a variety of flat products including flat screens of organic light-emitting diodes (OLED), solar cells, liquid crystal displays (LCD), smart windows , and touch screens. The ITO in these devices is present as a flat, thin film only, as it loses its transparency when the thickness exceeds a few microns. [1]
ITO is fabricated mainly by thin layer deposition methods , and several attempts have been made to pattern the ITO layer . For example, ink-jet printing enables the fabrication of complex 2D patterns that can be utilized in organic solar cells , [2] , [3] flexible electronic devices, [4] and humidity sensors [5] . So far, to the best of our knowledge, ITO fabrication techniques have been limited to 2D structures only, despite the emerging need for 3D optoelectronic devices . [6] Therefore, the fabrication of such systems requires new fabrication processes, and among them, multiphoton absorption polymerization (MAP) is one of the most promising.
MAP is based on localized radical photopolymerization initiated by the simultaneous absorption of two photons in the IR range by a photoinitiator (PI), which dissociates into radicals and causes the cross-linking of a photoresist. [7] The nonlinear absorption is the key feature making the printing resolution exceed the diffraction limit wavelength because it requires a very high flux of photons, which is achieved only at the focal point of a focused, high-intensity IR laser beam. Therefore, formulations must be transparent to IR light to meet MAP requirements, making inks with inorganic fillers challenging to formulate. The particles should be nanometric and have a refractive index similar to the organic polymerizable components, which is not a simple task. In addition, nanometric fillers increase the viscosity of the formulations, leading to poor heat conductivity , whereas MAP requires good heat conductivity .MAP is an established process for fabricating micro-optic devices, including waveguides , [8] mechanical [9] , optical metamaterials , [10] photonic crystals [11] , and more. [12] It is also used in tissue engineering , drug delivery applications , [13] , [14] microfluidics, and electronics. Whereas MAP might be a promising technique for ceramics fabrication, the printing compositions are mainly limited to resins composed of transparent solutions of pre-ceramic precursors. [15] Among the reported precursors, significant progress has been made on silicon-containing printed objects using silicon pre-ceramic polymers (PCP). [16] , [17] , [18] , [19]
The expansion of the currently limited MAP pre-ceramic resin library beyond the PCP family is highly demanded to achieve device functionalities via a combination of both geometric design and intrinsic material properties. Synthesis of pre-ceramic precursors through sol-gel reactions which involve polymerization of inorganic polymers from molecular precursors has the highest versatility thanks to the large availability of exploitable materials. This characteristic is indeed reflected in the literature, where several works have first introduced sol-gel reactions for larger-scale 3D printing techniques of vat photopolymerization [20] , [21] , [22] , [23] or have directly utilized them in MAP. [24] , [25] , [26] , [27] , [28] , [29] , [30] , [31] , [32] , [33] , [34] , [35] , [36] , [37] Sol-gel process for ITO was also reported for fabrication of thin films, resulting in electrical resistivity of 27000–1400 Ω for 8 % wt. doping, and a transparency of 80 % at the visible range when the thickness is 200 nm. [38]
MAP of microceramic structures was demonstrated for lasing applications, obtaining unique mechanical properties, and optical applications, but it has never been used to fabricate ceramic structures made of TCOs. Here, we present the fabrication of transparent and conductive ITO in complex 3D shapes at a sub-micron resolution by MAP printing. The method is based on combining photopolymerization with sol-gel chemistry of solutions composed of two metal salts. The resulting printed ITO showed bulk conductivity in the range of 1–17 S/cm throughout all the investigated range of sintering temperatures , with a maximum average conductivity of ∼15 S/cm at a quasi-optimal temperature of 1000 °C.

## 2. Experimental section


### 2.1. Materials

Indium(iii) nitrate hydrate (Alfa Aesar, In 29 % min.), Tin(iv) chloride pentahydrate (Acros Organics, 98+%, extra pure), sodium hydroxide (Thermo Scientific, pearls, 97 %), ethanol absolute (bio-lab ltd, Israel), ammonium hydroxide (Alfa Aesar, 28 %), triethanolamine (TEA, Sigma-Aldrich, minimum 98 %), acrylic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, containing 200 ppm MEHQ as an inhibitor, 99 %), ethoxylated (15) trimethylolpropane triacrylate (TMPTA, SR9035, SARTOMER), 2,2-Dimethoxy-1,2-diphenylethan-1-one (DMPA, Irgacure 651, Ciba), 1-methoxy-2-propanol (propylene glycol methyl ether, PM, Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99.5 %).

### 2.2. ITO preceramic ink preparation

For the preparation of 2 g of ITO ink, 0.876 g Indium(iii) nitrate and 0.060 g Tin(iv) chloride were dissolved in a mixture of 1:1 ethanol and a 0.0005 M sodium hydroxide solution in water. After the salts were fully dissolved, 0.1 g ammonium hydroxide solution (24 %) was added to the solution dropwise while vigorously stirring using a magnetic stirrer . After 20 minutes of stirring, 0.180 g TEA was added to the reaction, followed by 10 minutes of stirring. Next, the polymerizable compounds were added to the ink: first, 0.122 g acrylic acid, and after stirring for 30 minutes, 0.039 g TMPTA and 0.010 g DMPA were added too. All preparations were conducted at room temperature and without any unique atmosphere. The flow chart of the ink preparation is presented in SI 1.

### 2.3. Two-photon printing

The ITO preceramic ink formulation was printed using a Photonic Professional GT printer (Nanoscribe GmbH, Germany). A drop of ITO ink was placed on a 70 μm glass substrate and was covered by a 500 μm sapphire substrate . A custom-made 170 μm-thick metal element was placed between the substrates as a spacer, thus representing the available printing volume. The objects were printed upside down on the sapphire substrate. The printing was performed using a ×25 magnification lens. The laser power was 50 mW, and the scanning speed was 20000 μm/s and it was constant throughout printing of the entire model. The slicing distance was 1 μm and the hatch width was 0.5 μm. After printing, the sapphire was immersed in water for 3 minutes, followed by another one and half minute in PM to dissolve the uncured ink. Finally, the developed pre-ceramic objects attached to the sapphire substrate were air-dried.

### 2.4. Heating profile

The sapphire with the printed pre-ceramic ITO was heated under air in a tube furnace (Zhengzhou Kejia Furnace, China). The heating rate was 5 °C/min, with one hour hold at 60, 95, 250, 340, 460, and 500 °C, and another hold of one hour at the maximum sintering temperature in the range of 600–1500 °C. The schematic heating profile is presented in SI 2.

### 2.5. Characterization

TGA and DSC analyses of the printed samples were performed under airflow at the temperature range of 25–1400 °C with a 3 °C/min heating rate, using STA TG-DSC 449 F3 Jupiter (NETZSCH-Geratebau GMBH). Powder X-ray diffraction dispersion was measured by a Philip PW1820 diffractometer.
SEM imaging was performed with Extra High-Resolution Scanning Electron Microscopy Magellan 400 L (ThermoFisher, former FEI). The homogeneity of the ceramic material was examined by SEM using an EDS detector.
Optical images were taken with an optical microscope (BX53M, Olympus, Japan) using ×100 lens and lighting the structures from below. Due to the very small size of the 3D printing area, conventional transmission measurements with a spectrophotometer are challenging to perform. Instead, optical images were taken in transmission mode to qualitatively estimate the transmission. This test was used because each optical image contained the 3D-printed plate and surrounding substrate in the same illumination area. The transparency was evaluated using the image analysis software ImageJ. The images were changed to grayscale , and the average value of the upper plates’ areas was subtracted from that of the bottom plates. Each value was evaluated using at least 7000 pixels from each region to achieve the mean value of the transmission.
The evaluation of the particles formed in the ink at the initial stage was performed by Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) measurements. Since the concentration of the particles was small, which resulted in a low signal, the dispersion was further concentrated, by ultrafiltration tube (100 kD, VS0241 VIVA SPIN,Beit Haemek, Israel). 2 ml in each tube were filtered for 10 min twice, (total 20 min) by centrifuge at 6000 rpm. After 20 min, 1 ml was remained and tested by the DLS. The size distribution of the particles was measured by NanoZS Zetasizer (Malvern, Worcestershire, UK). Each measurement was performed in triplicate.
The rheological measurements were performed using a rheometer (RheoStress HAAKE) with a Cup and Bob geometry with a gap of 0.6 (3 ml) mm at 20 °C. The viscosity was measured at the shear rates range of 20–80 s−1. Each measurement took two minutes and conducted three times, and the results were averaged.
AFM images were taken in NanoWizard 3 instrument (JPK, Berlin, Germany) with a silicon tip that has a spring constant of 40 N/m (Aspire, Team Nanotec GmbH, Villingen-Schwenningen, Germany).

#### 2.5.1. Electrical measurements

The fabrication of the electrical contacts was performed after the sintering process directly on the same sapphire substrate where the 3D structures were printed. Large area isolated pads were realized as close as possible to the printed structure using a screen-printing Ag paste (DM-SP-3060S, from DYCOTEC Materials) directly deposited under an optical microscope with 20x magnification and using a 1 mm diameter needle. After waiting (> 30 min) for the Ag paste to dry at room temperatures, high-resolution electrical connections of the MAP structures to the Ag pads were fabricated via focused ion beam (FIB)-induced Pt deposition by using a Helios NanoLab 600i FIB/SEM. The Pt-deposition was performed at 30 kV ion acceleration voltage, 2.5 nA ion current aperture and 2 µm nominal thickness deposition (i.e 2.2 nm/s nominal deposition rate). The measurement of the microstructures resistance was performed with a FLUKE 187 TRUE RMS multimeter . LCR measurements reported in SI were performed using a BK Precision 895 20 Hz-1 MHz LCR meter.

## 3. Results and discussion

The overall fabrication process for making micro-size ITO is schematically presented in Fig. 1 . It is composed of several steps, starting from the CAD model of the requested structure ( Fig. 1 a). then, synthesizing the photopolymerizable ITO resin through a sol-gel reaction with precursors having photo-reactive ligands, thus enabling localized gelation upon light irradiation rather than via sol-gel condensation reaction ( Fig. 1 b). After MAP printing is performed, the uncured resin is removed during the development step ( Fig. 1 c). The following step is aging for 1–14 days at room temperature, in which the sol-gel process occurs, along with evaporation of the remaining water, PM, and ethanol ( Fig. 1 d). The resulting object at this stage is amorphous . In the last step, the printed object undergoes a thermal treatment ( Fig. 1 e) at which the organic materials are decomposed, ITO crystals are formed and sintered to result in 3D crystalline ITO objects.
The overall fabrication process for making micro-size ITO is schematically presented in Fig. 1 . It is composed of several steps, starting from the CAD model of the requested structure ( Fig. 1 a). then, synthesizing the photopolymerizable ITO resin through a sol-gel reaction with precursors having photo-reactive ligands, thus enabling localized gelation upon light irradiation rather than via sol-gel condensation reaction ( Fig. 1 b). After MAP printing is performed, the uncured resin is removed during the development step ( Fig. 1 c). The following step is aging for 1–14 days at room temperature, in which the sol-gel process occurs, along with evaporation of the remaining water, PM, and ethanol ( Fig. 1 d). The resulting object at this stage is amorphous . In the last step, the printed object undergoes a thermal treatment ( Fig. 1 e) at which the organic materials are decomposed, ITO crystals are formed and sintered to result in 3D crystalline ITO objects.

### 3.1. Synthesis of ITO resin

The rationale behind selecting the various components of the printing composition that enables the reaction presented in Fig. 2 is explained in the following. The precursors for preparing the ITO printing composition are indium nitrate (In(NO 3 ) 3 ) and tin chloride (SnCl₄). In order to maintain the integrity of the structure during aging and sintering, it is beneficial to start with the highest achievable concentration, 47 wt% of the two salts. After the complete dissolution of the salts, ammonium hydroxide is added dropwise to the mixture to increase pH and catalyze the formation of oxane bonds through a condensation reaction . The increase in pH causes the formation of nanometric-size sol particles. The shift from a clear solution to the sol stage is indicated by light scattering of the sample, as evidenced by the Tyndall effect. Exceeding pH 2 causes the ITO sol to turn milky, meaning the particles exceed the size of visible wavelengths, rendering it unsuitable for MAP. Moreover, in order to sustain the system in a state of clear, non-viscous liquid, the prevention of spontaneous sol-gel transition without further growth of the sol particles is required. This can be achieved by adding a chelating agent that stops the condensation reactions by binding the metal ions at multiple sites, thus decreasing the sol-gel reaction rate. Various chelates can control the reactivity of metal ions, such as acetic and acrylic acid and triethanolamine (TEA) [39] . In this study, TEA is chosen due to its capacity to form up to four coordinative bonds with the metal ions, including indium and tin. [40] , [41]
The rationale behind selecting the various components of the printing composition that enables the reaction presented in Fig. 2 is explained in the following. The precursors for preparing the ITO printing composition are indium nitrate (In(NO 3 ) 3 ) and tin chloride (SnCl₄). In order to maintain the integrity of the structure during aging and sintering, it is beneficial to start with the highest achievable concentration, 47 wt% of the two salts. After the complete dissolution of the salts, ammonium hydroxide is added dropwise to the mixture to increase pH and catalyze the formation of oxane bonds through a condensation reaction . The increase in pH causes the formation of nanometric-size sol particles. The shift from a clear solution to the sol stage is indicated by light scattering of the sample, as evidenced by the Tyndall effect. Exceeding pH 2 causes the ITO sol to turn milky, meaning the particles exceed the size of visible wavelengths, rendering it unsuitable for MAP. Moreover, in order to sustain the system in a state of clear, non-viscous liquid, the prevention of spontaneous sol-gel transition without further growth of the sol particles is required. This can be achieved by adding a chelating agent that stops the condensation reactions by binding the metal ions at multiple sites, thus decreasing the sol-gel reaction rate. Various chelates can control the reactivity of metal ions, such as acetic and acrylic acid and triethanolamine (TEA) [39] . In this study, TEA is chosen due to its capacity to form up to four coordinative bonds with the metal ions, including indium and tin. [40] , [41]
A photoinitiator and monomers are added to enable the photopolymerization upon light irradiation during printing. The photoinitiator is DMPA, which is known as suitable for MAP printing, [42] and it is soluble in the printing composition. The monomers are added at the minimal concentration, 8 %wt, that still enables photopolymerization , in order to minimize the organic content of the printed objects. The monomers are acrylic acid and TMPTA. The primary polymerizable monomer in the formulation (i.e. acrylic acid) can also form multi-dentate bonds with the metal ions, and it can physically bond to the sol-gel oligomers . Consequently, the ITO sol-gel particles are integrated within the polymerized matrix formed upon IR laser irradiation during printing. Furthermore, a three-functional cross-linker (TMPTA) is also added to achieve a high strength of the printed objects.
Particle size evaluation performed by DLS measurements ( Fig. S3 a) revealed the majority of the particles is in the range of 10–100 nm, with a peak at 38±8 nm. SEM imaging of the dry formulation also shows the presence of particles in a similar size range ( Fig. S3b ).
The stability of the ink was evaluated by measuring it’s viscosity over time, and it’s ability to photopolymerize 7 days after preparation. It was found that the viscosities of the ink at day 0, day 7, and day 14 were 0.01683 Pa s, 0.01538 Pa s and is 0.01999 Pa s, respectively (measured at 20 1/s). The viscosity measurements , which were performed at shear rates of 20–80 1/sec are shown in Fig. S1 . Furthermore, all samples remained visually the same, without precipitation of particles. Additionally, UV curing of the ink was performed 7 days after preparation, and it was found that it polymerized well under irradiation by a LED lamp at 395 nm ( Fig. S2 ). Overall, since the viscosity for all samples is still in the range that enables printing after 7 days, without precipitation or gelation , it can be concluded that the ink is stable for at least 7 days. It should be noted that the printing process takes a very short time (below 1 minute), and there is no uncontrolled polymerization within the droplet, so the ink is stable during the fabrication process.

### 3.2. Fabrication and characterization

The ITO resin is drop-casted on a glass substrate and covered with a sapphire substrate . A 170 μm spacer is placed in between the substrates to create a fixed gap that can be filled by the ITO resin. The laser is focused by X25 lens on the sapphire interface to print objects in the upside-down direction, since the sapphire substrate is needed to endure the high process temperature required in the following fabrication steps. The glass substrate instead serves as a protective layer to prevent contact between the ITO resin and the lens. During the printing, the localized polymerization occurs within seconds for the entire object. This time scale fits radical photopolymerization of the acrylates present in the ink, in contrary to the time scale of sol-gel processes which takes more than two weeks for the tested formulation, which does not depend on light irradiation. We previously presented the photopolymerization time scale in sol-gel compositions containing acrylic monomers , in DLP printing. by following the disappearance of the acrylates peak in FTIR spectra when exposed to uv light for a very short time, while the composition contain the same monomers used in this study, acrylic acid and ethoxylated (15) trimethylolpropane triacrylate (TMPTA). [39]
The highest nominal resolution possible with the X25 lens used in this study is 0.6 micrometers. This size range cannot be evaluated by an optical microscope , and on the other hand, evaluating the as-printed samples by SEM before sintering is impossible since the sample is not completely dry. Therefore, the resolution was estimated for sintered samples by SEM imaging. The thinnest sintered lines are 0.2 micrometer ( Fig S4 ) compared to the STL file feature that is 1micrometer for the measured feature. The smaller feature size compared to the nominal value, is expected, due to the shrinkage of the printed object during aging and sintering, bringing an advantage in printing sol-gel based inks. After printing is completed, the sapphire substrate with the attached objects is first immersed in water for 3 minutes and then in PM for 90 seconds to rinse out non-reacted material. The careful removal of residual nitrate ions is in fact necessary to preserve the printed structure upon heating at high temperatures; otherwise, disintegration of the structures arises probably due to combustion reactions in which indium nitrate and triethanolamine act as oxidizer and fuel, respectively.
The evaporation of solvents after developing the printed objects occurs within only several minutes. The integrity and the structure of the objects after sintering was evaluated by optical microscopy and SEM, and it was found that there was no significant effect of the aging time. The aging time which is defined as the number of days that passed between printing and sintering, typically few days up to 14 days, is indicated for each sample that is presented in the results section. The surface structure of the dried printed samples was evaluated by both SEM imaging ( Fig S5 ) and AFM topography imaging ( Fig S6 ). It was found that the surface of the printed object is porous, with bon-ordered features in height range up to about 140 nm. Side-view of the printed object did not reveal a presence of the printed layer.
At this stage, the printed objects consist of transparent hybrid ITO amorphous gel, which would lose its organic components, crystalize, and sinter into a ceramic polycrystalline ITO upon appropriate heat treatment. Thermal Gravimetric Analysis-Differential Scanning Calorimetry (TGA-DSC) measurements were performed to investigate the processes during heating, and to assist in optimizing the heating profile. Notably, the endothermic peaks at low temperatures shown in Fig. 3 a correspond to the evaporation of ethanol (78 ℃), water (100 ℃), and PM (120 ℃). At about 150 ℃, a prominent exothermic peak indicates the combustion reaction of triethanolamine and indium nitrate. In the case water rinsing is not performed after printing, the absence of TEA’s evaporation peak (335 ℃) and the appearance of exploded parts at 200 ℃ support this claim. At 390–500 °C, three significant exothermic peaks are observed, which may be related to decomposition of organic oligomers . At 613 °C the crystallization instead occurs.
At this stage, the printed objects consist of transparent hybrid ITO amorphous gel, which would lose its organic components, crystalize, and sinter into a ceramic polycrystalline ITO upon appropriate heat treatment. Thermal Gravimetric Analysis-Differential Scanning Calorimetry (TGA-DSC) measurements were performed to investigate the processes during heating, and to assist in optimizing the heating profile. Notably, the endothermic peaks at low temperatures shown in Fig. 3 a correspond to the evaporation of ethanol (78 ℃), water (100 ℃), and PM (120 ℃). At about 150 ℃, a prominent exothermic peak indicates the combustion reaction of triethanolamine and indium nitrate. In the case water rinsing is not performed after printing, the absence of TEA’s evaporation peak (335 ℃) and the appearance of exploded parts at 200 ℃ support this claim. At 390–500 °C, three significant exothermic peaks are observed, which may be related to decomposition of organic oligomers . At 613 °C the crystallization instead occurs.
To prevent cracking in monolithic ceramics, the temperature is held for an hour at the beginning of each thermal-induced process, allowing the reactions to complete without rapid gas release. [43] , [44] Although the heating rates and temperature retention times should both impact the properties of sintered ceramics, this study primarily focused on evaluating the maximal sintering temperature. Typical sintering temperatures ranges for thin film ITO from 500 to 800 ℃, [38] , whereas for bulk ceramic ITO, it is 1400–1600 ℃. [45] However, the optimal sintering temperature for micro-sized ITO had not been explored yet, motivating this study. Preliminary results indicated a shape deformation at temperatures above 1200 ℃, and therefore we focused the sintering experiments in the range of 500 ℃ to 1200 ℃. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis confirmed the attainment of bulk ITO when the amorphous ITO underwent the described thermal treatment ( Fig. 3 b). XRD studies of thin films of ITO made by sol-gel process were performed by Thirumoorthi et al. and Gartner, M. et al. [46] , [47] In our study, we compared the data to the literature and found out that the printed structures exhibit a polycrystalline cubic structure without any amorphous phase or directionality , and are composed of only ITO.
In Fig. 1 a, d and e, we present a comprehensive characterization of the printed and sintered ITO objects. They display the evolution from the initial CAD model to the printed object and, finally, to the sintered ITO object. This visual representation underscores the successful transformation of the designed structure into the desired crystalline ITO form through our fabrication process, while the structural integrity is preserved throughout the different stages of the fabrication process. Moreover, the EDS analysis , as depicted in Fig. 3 c, provides insights into the elemental composition of the material; it reveals that there is a homogeneous dispersion of the elements in the structure, without any phase separation in the printed material. The presented EDS 2D mapping was performed on ITO objects sintered at 1100 ℃ but the same distribution was observed at various sintering temperatures, ranging from 500 to 1200 ℃. This uniform elemental distribution confirms the printed micro-sized structures as made of ITO. After sintering, the level of Sn doping was 9 at%, compared to 5 at% in the liquid formulations, which indicate that some In was leached out during the process. A solution for this difference could be calculating the exact amount of leaching and tune the initial composition to yield ITO with the intendent doping level. Nevertheless, 9 % Sn is still in the range of doping level that results in good conductivity. [48] These findings are important for obtaining ITO ceramics with consistent elemental composition and crystalline structure, which are critical for applications as 3D transparent conductive objects.

### 3.3. Effect of sintering temperature on transparency and electrical conductivity

ITO’s electrical conductivity and transparency originate from the high doping levels of indium oxide by Sn4+, making it a degenerate semiconductor. [49] The fermi level is shifted to the conductive band, making the material electrically conductive. The transparency results from the high energy gap of ∼5 eV, corresponding to UV photons and not visible ones. TCOs, like metals, also present the plasmon resonance, though slightly different; they reflect IR rather than visible light, thus increasing their visible light transparency. The following part of the study evaluated the effect of the sintering temperature on the transparency and electrical conductivity .
To study the sintering temperature effect on the printed ITO’s transparency, a 3D model was designed ( Fig. 4 a) and printed using the ITO resin ( Fig. 4 b-d), as previously reported by our research group. [24] The model consists of a base platform with a concealed “ITO” label written on top of it and a “roof” supported by trusses. The sintered ITO structures were captured with an optical microscope while lightened from underneath. The visibility of the printed word “ITO” serves as the primary indicator of transparency, but numerical quantification necessitated background subtraction using ImageJ software.
To study the sintering temperature effect on the printed ITO’s transparency, a 3D model was designed ( Fig. 4 a) and printed using the ITO resin ( Fig. 4 b-d), as previously reported by our research group. [24] The model consists of a base platform with a concealed “ITO” label written on top of it and a “roof” supported by trusses. The sintered ITO structures were captured with an optical microscope while lightened from underneath. The visibility of the printed word “ITO” serves as the primary indicator of transparency, but numerical quantification necessitated background subtraction using ImageJ software.
As evident from optical images ( Fig. 4 e), all samples exhibit transparency. While it may appear that transparency decreases with increasing temperature, background subtraction reveals no significant differences between the samples. The shrinkage of the base is temperature-dependent, leading to variations in thickness that impact transparency. Additionally, shrinkage results in slight detachment from the sapphire substrate, diminishing transparency for samples sintered at higher temperatures. The diameter of the base of the CAD model is 50 μm whereas all sintered objects have base diameter of ∼20 μm . This indicates a linear shrinkage of 60 % from the initial dimensions, a typical shrinkage value for sol-gel formulations. [50] We assume that the shrinkage of the base is not repeatable and depend on the binding degree to the substrate. However, the shrinkage of the roof of the object does not depend on the substrate adhesion and solely depends on the processing conditions.
As shown by the SEM images in Fig. 5 , the printed structures reveal a nanometric grain and nanometric pore texture across most of the investigated sintering temperatures. In the range of 500–800 ℃ there is no significant change in the microstructure. At 800 ℃ the fraction of pores starts to decrease and the sintering degree increases. Still, the grains and pores are smaller than the visible wavelength, which enables the transparency of the ITO that sintered from 500 to1150 ℃. Nevertheless, sintering at 1200 ℃ yields a transparent object, despite the larger grains and an absence of pores, implying that transparency is intrinsic to the material itself.
As shown by the SEM images in Fig. 5 , the printed structures reveal a nanometric grain and nanometric pore texture across most of the investigated sintering temperatures. In the range of 500–800 ℃ there is no significant change in the microstructure. At 800 ℃ the fraction of pores starts to decrease and the sintering degree increases. Still, the grains and pores are smaller than the visible wavelength, which enables the transparency of the ITO that sintered from 500 to1150 ℃. Nevertheless, sintering at 1200 ℃ yields a transparent object, despite the larger grains and an absence of pores, implying that transparency is intrinsic to the material itself.
In order to electrically characterize the printed ITO micro-structures, electrical contacts were fabricated on the sapphire substrate after printing and sintering. While large area pads are made for wire contacts, high resolution connections via focused ion-beam (FIB)-induced Pt deposition were realized to obtain conformal intimate contact with the sidewall of the 3D printed structures. For the characterization of the printed material at varying sintering temperatures, all the contacted micro-structures had the same nominal dimension. The Pt contact deposition was performed following the steps here reported; first, the Pt contacts were deposited up to about 1 µm distance from the ITO microstructures (i.e. without making direct contact with them), the presence of open circuit of the connection at this stage was checked to ensure that the Pt deposition was not affecting the conductivity of the bare structures, and, finally, the gap was closed by depositing Pt until the physical contact with the 3D microstructures was reached (until the lateral sidewall of the two targeted sides of the single microstructures was covered). An example of the fabricated Pt connection on a representative 3D sample is shown in Fig. 6 . It should be noted that some of the samples were without cracks and some with cracks, formed either during the sintering process , or as a result of the electrode deposition process . Figure Fig. S7 Shows a sample with a crack. After verifying the low resistivity of the fabricated connections by measuring the resistance of contacts with approximately the same length and aspect ratio of those used to contact the 3D object (i.e. resistance <0.1–0.2 mΩ), the measurement of conductivity of the MAP microstructures at different sintering temperatures was performed. The measured resistance and conductivity of different sets of MAP microstructures with fixed dimensions (20x35x35 µm 3 ) for three different temperatures (700, 1000 and 1150 °C) are reported in Table 1 . An averaged conductivity of 12.2±1.1, 14.5±1.5 and 2.0±0.6 S/cm is calculated for microstructures having sintering temperatures of 700, 1000 and 1150 °C, respectively. This dependence indicates that 1000 °C is the near-optimal sintering temperature to achieve the highest electrical conductivity with the present MAP printing method of 3D ITO microstructures. The conductivity variation on the sintering temperature is qualitatively in agreement with the degree of structure homogeneity, which can be observed from the SEM images in Fig. 5 . Indeed, an improvement of the uniformity can be observed from 700 and 1000 °C, which corresponds to an 18.7 % average conductivity increase, while a clear microstructures deterioration with increased porosity passing from 1000 to 1150 °C corresponds to a 86.4 % drop in conductivity. Nevertheless, despite these variations, it is worth mentioning that conductivity between 2 and 15 S/cm is obtained throughout all the investigated sintering temperatures. The lower conductivity compared to bulk ITO may result from the porosity of the printed material and insufficient sintering, or due to doping level by the tin which was still not optimized in this study. Impedance spectroscopy measurements reported in the SI confirm the pure resistive component (i.e. almost null phase of the impedance) of the MAP printed structures. Table 1 . Measured resistance (R) and conductivity (σ) of the ITO MAP micro-structures with same dimension (20x35x35 µm 3 ) and sintered at different temperatures. The corresponding average resistance (R m ) and conductivity (σ m ) with associated standard deviation for each set of micro-structures are also reported. The error of the measured resistance and calculated conductivity arise from the multimeter noise/scale and error propagation due to an estimated discrepancy between nominal and experimental size of the 3D ITO micro-structures of 1 µm for each dimension, respectively.
In order to electrically characterize the printed ITO micro-structures, electrical contacts were fabricated on the sapphire substrate after printing and sintering. While large area pads are made for wire contacts, high resolution connections via focused ion-beam (FIB)-induced Pt deposition were realized to obtain conformal intimate contact with the sidewall of the 3D printed structures. For the characterization of the printed material at varying sintering temperatures, all the contacted micro-structures had the same nominal dimension. The Pt contact deposition was performed following the steps here reported; first, the Pt contacts were deposited up to about 1 µm distance from the ITO microstructures (i.e. without making direct contact with them), the presence of open circuit of the connection at this stage was checked to ensure that the Pt deposition was not affecting the conductivity of the bare structures, and, finally, the gap was closed by depositing Pt until the physical contact with the 3D microstructures was reached (until the lateral sidewall of the two targeted sides of the single microstructures was covered). An example of the fabricated Pt connection on a representative 3D sample is shown in Fig. 6 . It should be noted that some of the samples were without cracks and some with cracks, formed either during the sintering process , or as a result of the electrode deposition process . Figure Fig. S7 Shows a sample with a crack. After verifying the low resistivity of the fabricated connections by measuring the resistance of contacts with approximately the same length and aspect ratio of those used to contact the 3D object (i.e. resistance <0.1–0.2 mΩ), the measurement of conductivity of the MAP microstructures at different sintering temperatures was performed. The measured resistance and conductivity of different sets of MAP microstructures with fixed dimensions (20x35x35 µm 3 ) for three different temperatures (700, 1000 and 1150 °C) are reported in Table 1 . An averaged conductivity of 12.2±1.1, 14.5±1.5 and 2.0±0.6 S/cm is calculated for microstructures having sintering temperatures of 700, 1000 and 1150 °C, respectively. This dependence indicates that 1000 °C is the near-optimal sintering temperature to achieve the highest electrical conductivity with the present MAP printing method of 3D ITO microstructures. The conductivity variation on the sintering temperature is qualitatively in agreement with the degree of structure homogeneity, which can be observed from the SEM images in Fig. 5 . Indeed, an improvement of the uniformity can be observed from 700 and 1000 °C, which corresponds to an 18.7 % average conductivity increase, while a clear microstructures deterioration with increased porosity passing from 1000 to 1150 °C corresponds to a 86.4 % drop in conductivity. Nevertheless, despite these variations, it is worth mentioning that conductivity between 2 and 15 S/cm is obtained throughout all the investigated sintering temperatures. The lower conductivity compared to bulk ITO may result from the porosity of the printed material and insufficient sintering, or due to doping level by the tin which was still not optimized in this study. Impedance spectroscopy measurements reported in the SI confirm the pure resistive component (i.e. almost null phase of the impedance) of the MAP printed structures.
Table 1 . Measured resistance (R) and conductivity (σ) of the ITO MAP micro-structures with same dimension (20x35x35 µm 3 ) and sintered at different temperatures. The corresponding average resistance (R m ) and conductivity (σ m ) with associated standard deviation for each set of micro-structures are also reported. The error of the measured resistance and calculated conductivity arise from the multimeter noise/scale and error propagation due to an estimated discrepancy between nominal and experimental size of the 3D ITO micro-structures of 1 µm for each dimension, respectively.

## 4. Conclusion

This study successfully demonstrates a new approach for fabricating transparent and conductive indium tin oxide (ITO) 3D structures using a combination of sol-gel chemistry and two-photon polymerization (MAP). In particular, the performed investigation of the properties of the MAP printed ITO objects on the sintering temperature reveals an almost independent transparency and a quasi-optimal temperature of 1000 °C for a maximum conductivity in the range of 10–20 S/cm. The results show that the proposed method allows for the fabrication of complex ITO structures at a sub-micron resolution, which can find applications in various fields, such as optoelectronics . The heating profile design ensures the conversion of the hybrid ITO gel into polycrystalline ceramic ITO. However, the optimization process is closely related to the desired characteristics of the end products. Overall, this research expands the possibilities for fabricating 3D optoelectronic devices by introducing a new technique for producing transparent and conductive ITO structures, opening further advancements in the field.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Liraz Larush: Data curation. Naor Menda: Data curation. Daria Savraeva: Data curation. Natanel Jarach: Writing – review & editing. May Yam Moshkovitz Douvdevany: Data curation. Tamar Rosental: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation. Andrea Ottomaniello: Methodology, Investigation, Data curation. Sapir Mizrahi: Data curation. Shlomo Magdassi: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Virgilio Mattoli: Supervision.

## Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments

We would like to express our gratitude to Yehudit Garcia from the Peter Brojde Center and the Nano Centres’ team for teaching and providing invaluable assistance, to Daniel Boaz on the AFM measurements, and to Ayelet Bunin on the rheology measurements. Special thanks to Dr Cooperstein for paving the way for this research. The generous support of Ms. Susan Lawi for the scholarship of TR via the American Friends of The Hebrew University is highly appreciated. V.M. and A.O. gratefully acknowledge support from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the FET Open grant agreement 5DNanoPrinting – no. 899349 .

## Appendix A. Supplementary material

Download: Download Word document (350KB) Supplementary material
Supplementary material
Download: Download Word document (1MB) Supplementary material
Supplementary material