
## 1. Introduction

Transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) combine broad spectral transparency with high electrical conductivity, making them essential in modern optoelectronic devices. As transparent electrodes they are used in flat screens, transparent electronics, solar cells, and a variety of other applications [ 1 ].
TCOs are wide bandgap semiconductors ( E G > 3 eV) which results in high transparency over a large wavelength range. They comprise a big group of doped metal oxides with different compositional and structural properties. Common TCOs include SnO 2 , In 2 O 3 and ZnO, which are often doped with metals such as Sn, In or Al to reach high conductivities [ 2 ]. Another way of doping TCOs is the creation of oxygen vacancies in the metal oxide lattice, which can be controlled by the oxygen pressure during the deposition process [ [3] , [4] , [5] ] and by post-deposition annealing at moderate temperature in inert atmosphere [ 6 ].
By adjusting metal dopant and oxygen vacancy concentration, the carrier concentration can be increased to achieve high conductivities, which simultaneously affects the optical properties. An increased carrier concentration can enhance the band degeneracy and shift the absorption edge to lower wavelengths (Burstein-Moss shift). At the same time, it leads to increased parasitic free carrier absorption and therefore compromises the optical properties in the infrared wavelength range. To reduce this effect, high-mobility TCOs with moderate carrier concentrations are investigated, such as hydrogen or cation-doped (Ce, Zn, Zr) In 2 O 3 [ [7] , [8] , [9] , [10] , [11] ] and fluorine-doped In 2 O 3 [ 12 , 13 ].
Besides chemical composition, the microstructural characteristics influence the electrical, optical and mechanical properties. Typically, TCOs are deposited at elevated temperatures, forming polycrystalline films, in which the scattering at grain boundaries and impurities limits the carrier mobility. By adjusting deposition method, temperature, and atmosphere, it is possible to deposit most TCOs in amorphous form. Although these films exhibit long-range structural disorder, they can form a conduction band and achieve high mobilities due to the lack of grain boundaries [ [14] , [15] , [16] ]. This makes amorphous TCOs favorable for applications that require low-temperature processing [ 10 , 14 ].
Post-deposition annealing is often used to further optimize TCO properties, as it enables fine-tuning of the material characteristics through controlled processing conditions such as temperature, duration and atmosphere. From the given complexity and variety of existing TCOs, it becomes clear that the term annealing encompasses a broad range of mechanisms, such as solid state crystallization [ 12 , 17 ], grain boundary and impurity passivation [ 18 , 19 ], and dopant activation [ 20 , 21 ].
In addition to these material-specific considerations, device integration often imposes further constraints on annealing processes. Many applications include materials with a limited temperature budget, such as amorphous, polymeric or organic substrates. In these cases, low temperature TCO deposition is required, which limits the process parameter space and can result in suboptimal film properties. This highlights the need for post-deposition annealing techniques that selectively target the TCO layer without compromising the underlying substrate.
In this context, laser-based annealing is a powerful alternative to conventional thermal processes which are typically limited to variations in temperature and annealing time. In contrast, laser systems offer a wide range of tunable parameters (e.g. wavelength, pulse duration, repetition frequency) that enable precise energy deposition in a confined area and depth, allowing for layer selective modification of thin films [ [22] , [23] , [24] , [25] , [26] ].
This work emphasizes the importance of understanding the annealing mechanisms for different TCOs and adapting the annealing processes accordingly. Furthermore, it demonstrates the advantages of using laser annealing for layer-selective modification of TCO thin films on temperature-sensitive solar cell substrates, enabling precise tuning of both electrical properties and modification depth.

## 2. Experimental approach


### 2.1. Sample preparation and laser annealing

To evaluate the impact of TCO laser annealing on temperature sensitive solar cells, we used samples based on a typical silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cell architecture (see Fig. 1 ). These samples were fabricated on shiny etched, planar 4-inch, 10 Ωcm n-type floatzone wafers. After wet-chemical cleaning, an intrinsic and p-doped amorphous silicon (a-Si:H(i/p)) and an a-Si:H(i/n) layer stack were deposited by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) on the front and rear side, respectively. On the 28 nm thick front side a-Si:H(i/p) layer, the TCO film was deposited by sputter deposition with a target thickness of d t . Two prototypical TCOs were investigated: polycrystalline very oxygen-rich tin-doped indium oxide (p-ITO) ( d t = 75 nm) and amorphous fluorine-doped indium oxide (a-IFO) ( d t = 100 nm). The a-Si:H(i/p)/cSi heterojunction serves not only as the temperature-sensitive substrate [ 27 , 28 ] but also prevents the current flow from TCO to the wafer during sheet resistance R sh measurements. For p-ITO films, room temperature deposition via DC sputtering from a In 2 O 3 /SnO 2 97/3 wt % rotary target was used. A high O 2 content for the sputter atmosphere was chosen to obtain films highly responsive to post deposition annealing. Details for a-IFO deposition can be found elsewhere [ 12 ].
The laser annealing processes in ambient air were performed with a 308 nm XeCl excimer laser system (pulse duration: 25 ns, repetition frequency: 50 Hz), with a homogenized line pulse profile of 1 cm length and 1 mm width. Multi-pulse processes of 1, 10, 100 and 500 pulses with fluences from 50 mJ/cm 2 to 200 mJ/cm 2 were performed on fields of 1 cm x 1 cm across the unseparated wafers, by varying the feed rate from 2 mm/s to 50 mm/s. For reference, a wafer from each TCO group was laser cut in 2 cm x 2 cm pieces to conduct hotplate annealing processes in ambient air at four different temperatures (200 °C, 250 °C, 300 °C and 350 °C) for a total annealing time of 15 min.

### 2.2. Characterization

Dark field microscopy images were taken using an Olympus MX63 microscope to evaluate the film integrity of the samples after annealing. R sh was measured for each lasered field across the wafers and for the hotplate-annealed samples by four-point probe measurements, using a TLM-Scan by PV-Tools featuring a collinear probe arrangement with probe spacing of 1.55 mm. After R sh mapping the laser-annealed fields on the wafers, they were isolated by laser cutting for further characterization. Hall effect measurements in the van der Pauw probe setup were conducted with an in-house built tool for selected samples to acquire carrier concentration N and mobility μ . Microstructural changes of the TCOs were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( λ = 1.54 Å) in Bragg-Brentano geometry. After acquiring a diffractogram of each sample over an angle range of 20° to 50°, the (222) diffraction peak at around 30.5° was identified as the only visible indium oxide related peak. Hence, a high-resolution measurement from 29.6° to 31.4° with a step size of 0.003° was recorded. The data were analyzed by fitting with a pseudo-Voigt profile. An Auriga 60 crossbeam workstation by Zeiss was used to acquire scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images from the a-IFO sample cross section before and after selected annealing processes that resulted in the most significant R sh reduction.

## 3. Results and discussion


### 3.1. Electrical properties after annealing

The results of the four-point probe R sh mapping of the laser-annealed thin films are shown in Fig. 2 . For both TCO types, a progressive reduction in R sh is measured with increasing laser pulse fluence for single-pulse processes. With increasing pulse repetitions R sh is continuously decreased, which shows a cumulative nature of the annealing mechanisms for both TCO types, which has been reported before for multi-pulse laser annealing on TCO thin films [ 29 , 30 ]. The laser-annealed p-ITO samples reach a minimal R sh of 54 ± 8 Ω/sq which is significantly lower than the best hotplate process at 250 °C with a R sh of 190 ± 1 Ω/sq. In contrast, R sh of the a-IFO thin film is reduced from 54 ± 8 Ω/sq to 37.2 ± 0.3 Ω/sq for laser annealing while the hotplate yields values as low as 28.0 ± 0.7 Ω/sq. For both TCOs, dark field microscopy showed crack formation and ablation at higher fluences and pulse numbers. With increasing fluence, fewer pulses could be applied before compromising the film integrity. In this study, only parameter sets that preserved the film integrity were evaluated for their annealing effects.
To analyze the observed differences in R sh reduction for hotplate and laser annealing, Hall measurements were conducted for selected p-ITO and a-IFO thin film samples, shown in Fig. 3 a) and b) respectively. The measurements for the lowest R sh reached with both annealing processes are summarized in Table 1 . The deviations between Hall and four-point probe measured R sh values can be attributed to the different measurement setups and sample sizes. While the collinear four-point probe measurements on the laser-annealed fields were conducted on full wafers, the hotplate-annealed samples were already separated in 2 cm x 2 cm pieces. For both, an error is introduced as this setup requires a large sample size in comparison to the needle spacing [ 31 ]. The small sample sizes used lead to a possible overestimation of the measurements. Table 1 . Mean and standard deviation of R sh , μ and N obtained from Hall measurements for p-ITO and a-IFO before and after annealing. The results for hotplate annealing at 250 °C and laser annealing with the R sh minimizing parameters. Additionally, results for hotplate annealing at 350 °C are displayed for the p-ITO thin film.
Table 1 . Mean and standard deviation of R sh , μ and N obtained from Hall measurements for p-ITO and a-IFO before and after annealing. The results for hotplate annealing at 250 °C and laser annealing with the R sh minimizing parameters. Additionally, results for hotplate annealing at 350 °C are displayed for the p-ITO thin film.
For the laser-annealed p-ITO thin films, increasing fluence and pulse repetitions lead to a simultaneous increase of carrier concentration and mobility. At 500 pulses with a fluence of 160 mJ/cm 2 , the lowest R sh is measured, resulting from a carrier concentration of (2.9 ± 0.3) x 10 -20 cm -3 and mobility of 33 ± 3 cm 2 /Vs. Similarly, an increasing temperature for the hotplate annealing processes results in a rising N , reaching (2.5 ± 0.6) x 10 -20 cm -3 at 350 °C. Initially, the mobility increases as well, peaking 34 ± 2 cm 2 /Vs for annealing at 250 °C. For higher temperatures however, μ decreases again, counteracting the rising trend of N . Consequently, R sh reaches its minimum of 167 ± 8 Ω/sq at 250 °C. In contrast, the laser annealing processes show no decline in mobility even at comparably high carrier concentrations, leading to the comparably lower R sh .
The increase in N for both annealing processes can be related to the creation of oxygen vacancies and Sn 4+ sites [ 32 ]. An increase in μ can be related to improved carrier transport within crystal grains and across grain boundaries, enabled by defect reduction such as the removal of Sn and oxygen interstitials [ 33 , 34 ] or enhanced crystallinity [ 35 ]. These microstructural changes due to annealing are discussed more detailed in the following section.
The measured reduction in mobility for hotplate annealing above 250 °C points towards enhanced impurity or grain boundary scattering. Since comparable carrier concentrations are measured for the laser-annealed thin films without decreasing mobility, we do not expect this to originate from enhanced scattering at oxygen vacancies or ionized impurities of electron donating atoms in the lattice. Instead, it is likely to be related to enhanced scattering at grain boundaries, surface or interface defects. This might be caused by the formation of vacancy clusters [ 33 ] Sn segregation [ 32 , 36 ] or oxygen adsorption at grain boundaries and the film surface [ 37 ]. Such effects are reported in literature frequently for indium oxide-based TCOs at post-deposition annealing temperatures above 250 °C. Due to the comparably longer hotplate annealing time of several minutes in comparison to nanoseconds for the laser annealing, oxygen diffusion and segregation to grain boundaries is likely to be more dominant for the hotplate annealing processes. Additionally, the temperature gradient induced by laser annealing, in contrast to the uniform temperature distribution in hotplate processes, might mitigate degradation effects throughout the entire depth of the film and at the substrate-film interface.
For the a-IFO thin films the R sh reduction by laser annealing is driven by an increasing carrier concentration (see Fig. 3 b)) from (4.2 ± 0.1) x 10 -20 cm -3 to (5.0 ± 0.7) x 10 -20 cm -3 and mobility from 28 ± 1 cm 2 /Vs to 31 ± 4 cm 2 /Vs with increasing fluence and pulse repetitions. Hotplate annealing at 250 °C leads to a lower R sh resulting from a significantly larger increase in μ to 73 ± 2 cm 2 /Vs that counterbalances the decreasing carrier concentration. The increased μ is attributed to crystallization of the a-IFO thin film, which is visible in the SEM cross sections shown in Fig. 4 . A comparison of the thin film in Fig. 4 a) before and b) after hotplate annealing displays the transition from an amorphous to a crystalline state. In contrast, Fig. 4 shows a-IFO thin films after laser annealing at 110 mJ/cm 2 with c) 10, d) 100 and e) 500 pulses, revealing an enhanced modification depth with increasing number of pulses. For 500 pulses the greatest modification depth is observed for the laser parameters used in this study, with a substantial part of the film exhibiting crystallinity. However, a residual amorphous phase remains near the substrate interface. This partial crystallization accounts for the relatively low mobility, as only a fraction of the material exhibits enhanced mobility. Within the crystallized region, residual amorphous phases or smaller crystallites might still limit the mobility in comparison to the values reached by hotplate annealing. While in our experiments the laser processes lead to incomplete annealing of the a-IFO thin film, these results demonstrate that laser annealing can effectively target a very thin surface layer, enabling precise control over the modification depth on the nm scale. These findings suggest that further optimization of the laser parameters could potentially enable complete crystallization and enhance the electrical properties of such thin films.

### 3.2. Microstructural analysis

In the XRD measurements over a wide 2 θ range the only visible diffraction peak for both TCOs was related to the (222) crystal plane of indium oxide. Therefore, only this peak is shown and analyzed in detail to evaluate structural changes upon annealing. Fig. 5 a) shows the (222) diffraction peak for the p-ITO samples, before and after hotplate and laser annealing. The peak is located at 30.48° ± 0.01° in the as-deposited state and after hotplate annealing at temperatures until 250 °C. For 300 °C the peak shifts to a larger angle of 30.51° ± 0.01°
A comparably larger peak shift is observed for the laser annealing processes. As the pulse fluence and repetitions increase, the peak shifts to higher angles, reaching up to 30.60° ± 0.01° The observed shifts indicate a decrease in the lattice parameter, suggesting that the laser annealing process results in reduced atomic spacing. This can be associated with substitution of In 3+ ions with smaller Sn 4+ ions and formation of oxygen vacancies due to oxygen leaving the lattice [ 38 , 39 ]. This result is in good agreement with the carrier concentration increase discussed in the previous section. Since the XRD results indicate no enhanced crystallinity, we assign the increase in μ for this TCO (see Section 3.1 ) mostly to passivation of grain boundaries and ionized impurities.
Additionally, increasing the pulse fluence and repetitions of the laser annealing processes results in peak broadening and increasing asymmetry, which is not observed for the hotplate-annealed films. Both effects have also been observed by Scorticati et al. on laser treated thin films [ 40 ]. Despite the high transparency of the films in the visible wavelength range, the UV laser pulse energy is primarily absorbed near the surface, creating a temperature gradient that extends into the film depth. This can result in mechanical strain and gradients in microstructure and stoichiometry throughout the film. Consequently, the XRD peak reflects a combination of these varying properties of the TCO leading to broadened and asymmetric peaks. The observed gradient indicates that energy and temperature are deposited primarily near the surface, demonstrating the potential for modifying TCO thin films at the nanometer scale through UV laser annealing.
The XRD measurements of the a-IFO thin film shown in Fig. 5 (b) indicate an amorphous film in the as-deposited state. As a result of hotplate annealing at 200 °C, the (222) plane peak starts to evolve at an angle of 30.43° ± 0.01° As the annealing temperature increases up to 250 °C, the peak shifts to a higher angle of 30.73°± 0.01° accompanied by an increase in peak intensity. For the sample annealed at 300 °C there is a shift to 30.76° ± 0.01° but no significant intensity increase. These results indicate the phase change from amorphous to crystalline and increasing crystallinity of the film upon annealing at temperatures up to 250 °C, which supports the previous interpretation of the SEM images in Fig. 4 a) and b). During this process, more interstitial atoms are incorporated into the crystal structure, reducing atom spacing and causing the peak shift to larger angles. This observation supports the interpretation of the Hall data, showing maximum μ at 250 °C annealing temperature.
For laser annealing, no peaks are observed in the XRD results for the 1 and 10 pulse processes, indicating a lack of significant crystallinity. With increasing pulse repetitions, the (222) peak begins to emerge, suggesting that higher pulse counts promote progressive crystallization. Notably, at lower fluences, more pulses are required to measure significant crystallinity, highlighting the importance of optimizing both laser fluence and pulse repetitions for effective laser annealing. Moreover, under the experimental conditions used, the laser-annealed films exhibit broader peaks than the hotplate-annealed samples. This is indicative of smaller crystalline domains and crystallites as well as residual amorphous phases. These findings are consistent with the partial crystallization observed in the SEM cross-section images of the laser-annealed a-IFO thin film in Fig. 4 c) - e) and explain the lower carrier mobility discussed in Section 3.1 .

## 4. Conclusion

In this study, UV ns laser annealing of a-IFO and p-ITO was investigated to assess the potential for surface-near thin film modification on temperature sensitive silicon heterojunction solar cell substrates. For both TCOs we observed a continuously decreasing sheet resistance R sh with increasing pulse fluence and number of laser pulses. XRD and Hall measurements revealed that the observed annealing effects originate from fundamentally different underlying mechanisms for the two TCOs.
For the p-ITO thin film, the R sh reduction was primarily driven by an increase in carrier concentration N , which is believed to result from an elevated oxygen vacancy concentration. Reference hotplate annealing at temperatures exceeding 250 °C led to a decrease in mobility, indicating degradation effects not observed for the laser annealing processes. Consequently, the laser-annealed p-ITO thin film reached significantly lower R sh of 90 ± 20 Ω/sq, compared to the hotplate with a minimal R sh of 167 ± 8 Ω/sq. XRD measurements showed increasing peak asymmetry after laser annealing, suggesting the presence of a stoichiometric gradient within the film depth. The short time scale of the laser pulses and the gradient induced by surface-near energy deposition appear to be beneficial for the annealed thin film properties. It is proposed that these factors mitigate the depassivation of grain boundaries and the film surface, enabling the laser-annealed p-ITO thin film to maintain a relatively high mobility and outperform the reference hotplate processes.
In contrast, for the a-IFO thin film crystallization emerged as the primary annealing mechanism resulting in a significantly increased carrier mobility. However, the reference hotplate annealing resulted in a lower R sh of 26.0 ± 0.7 Ω/sq compared to the laser annealing processes examined, which yielded 40.7 ± 0.4 Ω/sq. SEM cross-sectional images of the a-IFO thin film after laser annealing showed a crystalline upper layer in the film, with a residual amorphous region at the bottom. This effect was exclusively observed for multi-pulse processes. As the number of pulses increased, crystal growth was initiated from the surface into the film's depth, indicating a progressive crystallization process. These findings illustrate that UV ns laser annealing processes enable a surface-near modification of the TCO thin film within the nanometer range.
For both types of TCOs, which exhibit fundamentally different microstructural and chemical properties after deposition, the XRD and SEM results demonstrate that UV ns laser annealing can induce microstructural and possibly stoichiometric gradients on a nm scale into the depth of TCO thin films. Such gradients can be advantageous for specific applications, as they allow to decouple interface effects like surface passivation and contact resistance from the optoelectronic properties of the bulk material. Additionally, the short timescale of elevated temperature induced by laser pulses might be beneficial since degradation mechanisms have less time to take effect.
As TCOs continue to be integrated into next-generation, low-temperature optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices, there is a noticeable trend towards film thickness reduction to target material and device efficiency as well as reduced indium consumption [ 41 , 42 ]. Our research underscores that laser annealing not only effectively targets thinner films on temperature-sensitive substrates but also opens up optimization regimes that are not accessible via conventional heating processes. Consequently, laser annealing processes stand out as a key enabling technology for the future of device manufacturing in next-generation optoelectronic and photovoltaic applications.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

A. Münzer: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. M. Weittenhiller: Data curation, Investigation. M. Bivour: Supervision, Methodology. F. Meyer: Funding acquisition, Project administration, Supervision. S.W. Glunz: Supervision.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Action (BMWK) within the project Phocohila (03EE1125A). We thank the project partners at Coherent for supporting the experiments and all co-workers at Fraunhofer ISE that contributed to this work.

## Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process

During the preparation of this work, the authors used FhGenie in order to improve the wording of certain sentences. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.