## Abstract

The reduced graphene oxide (rGO) thin films have attracted much attention in flexible electronic devices and supercapacitors (SCs). However, the chemical reduction mechanism of GO needs to be clarified, and the one-step process at low temperatures for preparing high-quality rGO thin films from GO dispersions is still blank in the research field. Here, we propose a one-step operation to spray GO dispersions onto substrate or current collector under a hydroiodic acid (HI) atmosphere while simultaneously achieving the preparation of rGO thin films . This pioneering metal-free, transfer-free, fast, low-temperature, environmentally friendly, and scalable spraying technology enables large-scale production of high-quality rGO. This method realizes the preparation of highly conductive and high transmittance rGO thin films on flexible polyimide and polyethylene terephthalate substrates, as well as the preparation of rGO thin films on current collectors as SCs electrodes. Density functional theory calculations show that oxygen-containing functional groups on the surface of GO exhibit a stronger adsorption energy for HI, and have a low energy barrier during reduction by HI. Ab initio molecular dynamics simulated the possible reduction reaction path between GO and HI at 90 °C, demonstrating that HI molecules can effectively reduce GO. Furthermore, the sheet resistance of the transparent conductive film created using the method developed in this study reaches approximately 1000 Ω/sq (80 % transparency), and the specific capacitance of the SCs electrode film created in this method is 433.2 F/g (5 mV/s, 1 M H 2 SO 4 ). Our study not only validates the efficacy of the one-step synthesis method for rGO thin films but also provides theoretical insights into the underlying reaction mechanism. This work holds significant promise for advancing applications in various electronics by facilitating large-scale production of high-quality rGO thin films.

## 1. Introduction

Graphene is a single one-atom-thick layer of carbon atoms packed in a perfect two-dimensional honeycomb lattice with sp 2 hybridization [1] , [2] . Graphene material has attracted significant attention for having superior electrical [3] , [4] , [5] , thermal [6] , optical [7] , planar surface area [8] , mechanical [9] , and chemical [10] properties. However, widespread material adoption will only be driven by developing a large-scale, cost-effective method to produce high-quality graphene. The current state of graphene production can be divided into bottom-up and top-down routes. The former approaches, such as the chemical vapor deposition method [11] and epitaxial growth method [12] , seek to synthesize graphene from carbon compounds such as methane and silicon carbide . These methods are often carried out at higher temperatures and must transfer the graphene from growth substrates to the target substrates [13] . Furthermore, there are still limited by some drawbacks, such as highly toxic clean room operation, difficulty in making uniform quality, production capability, and high production cost; thus, the need to meet the economic expectations of the industry. This challenge can be addressed using an efficient and scalable method of graphene production, which is the top-down approach starting from the three-dimensional graphite exfoliated into the two-dimensional graphene. This method of making graphene oxide (GO) from the oxidative processing of graphite and subsequent reduction is the most convenient technique for fabricating graphene-like materials, such as reduced graphene oxide (rGO) [14] , [15] . This top-down method can easily provide a large-scale production of rGO at low cost, which can be used for many applications [16] , [17] , [18] , [19] , [20] , [21] , [22] , especially flexible and wearable electronics [23] , and energy storage [17] , [18] , [24] .
At this stage, the rGO films are mainly prepared by depositing rGO dispersions or reducing pre-deposited GO films [25] . However, the preparation of rGO materials for flexible transparent electronic applications requires complex dispersion and transfer steps. Compared with GO dispersions with better fluidity and more uniform dispersion, the process of dispersing rGO materials has more tremendous obstacles because most rGO materials are non-dispersible. The flexible electronic devices use polymer materials as substrates. The material characteristics cause polymer substrates to be processed below the glass transition temperature . Among popular conversion of GO to rGO strategies are thermal annealing and chemical reduction pathways or their combination [25] , [26] , [27] , [28] , [29] . The high-temperature thermal reduction cannot apply to substrates with low melting points like glass and flexible polymers. Hydrazine is the most generally employed reducing agent due to its high reduction efficiency [14] , [15] , [22] , [30] , [31] , [32] , but it has the problem of severe toxicity and explosibility. It is worth noting that the rGO films are liable to crack or break up when hydrazine or sodium borohydride are used as reducing agents [30] . Pham et al. [33] developed the process of mixing GO with hydrazine and then spraying it on the preheated substrate. However, the system requires heat at 240 °C, higher than the glass transition temperature of often-used plastic substrates such as polyimide (PI) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET), and is highly toxic and has explosion risks. Feng et al. [34] proposed the reduction of GO using a sodium-ammonia solution as the reducing agent. Nonetheless, dangerous metallic sodium and ammonia, which have a powerful irritating odor, were used, and the solution is strongly alkalic. As a result, this method is more dangerous and has higher economic costs. Advanced reduction methods such as plasma [35] , [36] , electrochemical [37] , microwave [38] , and laser reduction [39] , [40] have been developed by researchers to avoid the secondary transfer step and the use of highly toxic and hazardous chemicals . However, some problems must be addressed when using advanced reduction methods, such as the weak reducing ability of GO and high energy consumption. These problems can reduce the quality of the rGO thin films and the economics of commercial implementation. Therefore, there is currently no suitable reduction method than chemical reduction for large-scale production of rGO thin films on flexible substrates [41] . Chemical reduction is a more economical and straightforward solution for large-scale preparation of rGO thin films on flexible substrates. The critical issue is to find a reducing agent more suitable for this process [25] . Hydroiodic acid (HI) [20] , [42] , [43] , [44] , which is much safer than hydrazine, has expanded the application prospects of rGO films on flexible substrates due to its low temperature and toxicity reducing environment. However, the current strategy for preparing rGO flexible transparent conductive films is still two-step: preparation of GO films and reduction. It is worth noting that using chemical reducing agents to prepare high-quality rGO thin films in a simple, efficient, and safe one-step process is still a blank in this field.
In addition, rGO thin films are also widely used as electrode materials in energy storage systems . Supercapacitors (SCs), which have the advantages of novelty, low cost, environmental protection, and high performance, have attracted particular attention from more researchers. The rGO material has excellent material properties, high theoretical specific capacitance value, and abundant graphite raw material reserves, so it is the most promising electrode material for SCs' systems [8] , [9] , [11] , [24] , [2] , [3] , [4] , [17] , [18] , [19] , [20] , [21] . By reducing GO, large-scale production of rGO was achieved. Strong reducing agents may over-reduce GO, thereby removing a large number of oxygen-containing functional groups (OCFGs) that can serve as pseudocapacitive sites, thereby reducing the specific capacitance of the material [8] , [18] . The combination of spraying GO and laser reduction can quickly prepare SCs electrodes without requiring secondary transfer of rGO materials. However, the high manufacturing and maintenance costs of laser equipment limit the large-scale application of this technology [9] . Furthermore, the preparation of SCs electrodes in many researchers’ reports first involves the reduction of GO, then the secondary transfer of rGO material slurry to the current collector surface, and finally used of SCs for electrochemical testing [8] , [17] , [18] . This type of method increases the steps of SCs electrode preparation, and involves issues such as precise control of rGO slurry preparation and uniform dispersion steps. The use of drop casting, spray coating, spin coating , filtration method, and Dr Blade method to prepare GO films and then reduction avoids the secondary transfer step of rGO materials [27] . Notwithstanding, the numerous processes increase the production cost, and the surface and internal reduction degree of the rGO thin film may be uneven [7] . The electrochemical reduction method realizes the self-growth of materials on the current collector surface, avoiding secondary transfer and reducing GO simultaneously. In contrast, due to the high energy-consuming reduction conditions, the thickness and film-forming properties of the prepared electrode surface are difficult to stabilize control [24] . Therefore, finding an ideal one-step, facile, large-scale, more environmentally friendly, and economical GO reduction procedure that uses a small amount of reducing agent and does not require a transfer process to fabricate rGO thin films directly remains challenging.
Here, we present a new technique to produce directly large-scale rGO thin films on different substrates or current collectors (such as carbon cloth (CC) and platinum foil (PF)), which can be used for flexible electronic devices or energy storage system applications. In this convenient, fast, low-cost, and one-step method, the reduction of GO and the formation of rGO thin films can occur simultaneously on the substrate by GO spraying process under HI reducing atmosphere, without high-temperature annealing and secondary transfer process. So far, rGO thin films have prepared many routes, our method is the first simultaneous reduction of GO and film formation on flexible substrates or current collector substrates. The transmittance of rGO thin films can be easily controlled by adjusting the spraying time or the concentration of GO dispersion, and by adjusting the amount of HI, the degree of reduction of rGO can be controlled, resulting in a larger specific capacitance. In addition, first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations reveal the adsorption capacity of GO with different OCFGs for HI during the reduction process, among which the carbonyl (C = O) group has the strongest adsorption capacity for HI. Optimization of the transition state confirmed the lower reaction energy barrier exhibited throughout the reduction process. The possible process of GO reduction by HI was simulated using Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD), which provided possible theoretical guidance for the reduction mechanism of GO containing different OCFGs in the environment of the HI reducing agent. The prepared flexible transparent conductive film rGO/PET 0.2 mL HI exhibited a conductivity lower than 1000 Ω/sq and a transparency of 80 % on a PET substrate. The as-prepared rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI were applied in SCs, exhibiting high specific capacitances of 433.2 F/g at 5 mV/s. Its capacity retention is 93.26 % after 20,000 charge–discharge cycles.

## 2. Materials and experimental methods


### 2.1. Chemicals and materials

Graphite powder (∼45 μm), diphosphorus pentoxide (P 2 O 5 , 98 %), ammonium persulfate ((NH 4 ) 2 S 2 O 8 , 98 %), potassium permanganate (KMnO 4 , 99.3 %), H 2 SO 4 (98 %), H 2 O 2 (30 %), HCl (35 ∼ 37 %), ethanol (99.5 %), hydriodic acid (HI, 55 ∼ 58 %), polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), and acetylene carbon black (50 % compressed) were from FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation. Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film substrate (50 μm thickness) was from Toyobo Co., Ltd., Polyimide (PI) film substrate (50 μm thickness) was from Du Pont-Toray Co., Ltd., slide glass (1 mm thickness), and quartz glass (1 mm thickness) were from Matsunami Glass Ind., Ltd. Carbon cloth (CC) was from Ce Tech Co. Ltd (0.36 mm thickness) and platinum foil (PF) was from Nilaco Co. (0.02 mm, 99.95 %).

### 2.2. Preparation of GO

The modification Hummers method synthesized GO slurry from the graphite powder (∼45 μm) [45] , [46] . To prepare the raw material GO suspension for flexible conductive films, the GO slurry was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 30 min to eliminate oxidized graphite and unexfoliated graphite sheets resulting from incomplete oxidation . Then use 5000 rpm centrifugation to obtain GO precipitates with microscopic large sizes, and remove the microscopic small-sized GO in the supernatant resulting from deep oxidation. Large-sized GO as a raw material helps improve the conductivity and transmittance of rGO films [43] . Finally, the GO slurry is dispersed in DI water to obtain a stable suspension of GO with a specific volume density.
For the raw material GO suspension required to prepare SCs electrode materials , there is no need to perform a centrifugal separation step at 5000 rpm. After centrifugal separation at 3000 rpm to remove oxidized graphite and unpeeled graphite plates, it can be used to prepare electrode materials for SCs .

### 2.3. Fabrication of rGO flexible transparent conductive films on substrates

A schematic diagram of the one-step apparatus is given in Scheme 1 . The video of the fabrication process was shown as Supporting Information Video 1 . Typically, the substrate was put in a glass dish heated by a hot plate (Model HP-19U300, KPI, Japan), and then drop a certain amount of HI into the glass dish. A dilute GO aqueous suspension (0.2 mg/mL) was sprayed onto the preheated substrate under the reduction atmosphere of HI, using an airbrush (nozzle diameter of 0.5 mm, Mr. Hobby Procon Boy PS-290 trigger airbrush, Japan) system with CO 2 as a carrier gas. Then, the rGO film can be obtained by this one-step process in which the reduction of GO and the fabrication of rGO thin films can occur simultaneously. The type of substrate can be slide glass, quartz glass, PET, and PI. The HI vapor can diffuse highly and function as a strong reductant to effectively remove the OCFGs in GO. Moreover, the generated iodine from the reducing reaction can easily be removed from rGO when just heated because iodine is a sublime substance. Spraying GO onto the substrate at HI atmosphere causes a simultaneous GO reduction while coated on the substrate. This method is beneficial to the production of rGO thin films because it may avoid the multi-step preparation and reduction process of GO films and can effectively eliminate the problem of uneven reduction inside and on the surface of GO films. Further, HI can be reusable, and iodine can also be recycled from the acid. Thus, the method in this study should be environmentally benign.
A schematic diagram of the one-step apparatus is given in Scheme 1 . The video of the fabrication process was shown as Supporting Information Video 1 . Typically, the substrate was put in a glass dish heated by a hot plate (Model HP-19U300, KPI, Japan), and then drop a certain amount of HI into the glass dish. A dilute GO aqueous suspension (0.2 mg/mL) was sprayed onto the preheated substrate under the reduction atmosphere of HI, using an airbrush (nozzle diameter of 0.5 mm, Mr. Hobby Procon Boy PS-290 trigger airbrush, Japan) system with CO 2 as a carrier gas. Then, the rGO film can be obtained by this one-step process in which the reduction of GO and the fabrication of rGO thin films can occur simultaneously. The type of substrate can be slide glass, quartz glass, PET, and PI. The HI vapor can diffuse highly and function as a strong reductant to effectively remove the OCFGs in GO. Moreover, the generated iodine from the reducing reaction can easily be removed from rGO when just heated because iodine is a sublime substance. Spraying GO onto the substrate at HI atmosphere causes a simultaneous GO reduction while coated on the substrate. This method is beneficial to the production of rGO thin films because it may avoid the multi-step preparation and reduction process of GO films and can effectively eliminate the problem of uneven reduction inside and on the surface of GO films. Further, HI can be reusable, and iodine can also be recycled from the acid. Thus, the method in this study should be environmentally benign.

### 2.4. Fabrication of rGO-based film material on current collector

The required GO, PTFE, and acetylene carbon black were mixed at a mass ratio of 8:1:1 and dispersed evenly in a mixed solvent of DI water and ethanol (1:1, volume ratio) to obtain a mixed solution (1 mg/mL). The spraying and HI reduction steps are the same as those for flexible conductive films. The optional current collector types include carbon cloth (CC) or platinum foil (PF).

### 2.5. Characterization

The sheet resistance of the films was measured on the NPS SIGMA-5 + four-point probe resistance measurement system, and the transmittance data were obtained on a Jasso V-500 UV/VIS spectrometer with 550 nm for test wavelength selection. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) images were obtained using a JEM-1200EX. The STEM samples were prepared by drying a droplet of the graphene suspension on holey copper grids. The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were tested at room temperature with an FT-IR spectrometer (JASCO Corporation, FT/IR-6300) using the KBr pellet technique. The structure of the films was measured by RINT Ultima III Thin Layer X-ray diffraction (XRD). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, AXIS-ULTRA DLD, SHIMADZU CO., LTD.) was employed to analyze the elemental composition . Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images were recorded on JSM-7001F. Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out using DTG-60A (SHIMADZU CO., LTD.) instruments to measure the weight loss, and the measurements were performed at a scan rate of 10 ℃/min under a nitrogen atmosphere. Laser micro-Raman spectra were determined on NRS-7100 via JASCO with a 532 nm laser excitation . Contact angle measurements were carried out using the Asumi-Giken B100.

### 2.6. Electrochemical measurements

Electrochemical measurements of the three-electrode system were performed on a BioLogic SP300-SK-S electrochemical workstation. An aqueous 1 M H 2 SO 4 electrolyte was selected as the electrolyte. The polytetrafluoroethylene-coated stainless steel electrode holder, saturated calomel electrode (SCE, Hg/HgCl 2 ), and graphite rod electrode were used as the working electrode (WE), the reference electrode (RE), and the counter electrode (CE) respectively. Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) measurements range in current density from 1 to 25 A/g, and cyclic voltammetry (CV) scan rates range from 5 to 200 mV/s. The potential window tested ranged from 0 to 1 V (relative to SCE). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed at open circuit potential with a polarization voltage amplitude of 10 mV in the frequency range from 0.1 to 100 kHz. The specific capacitance C (F/g) value measured by GCD in the three-electrode system was obtained according to the following Eq. (1) [17] , [18] , [47] : (1) C = I · Δ t m · Δ V where I (A) is the value of the constant current in the GCD measurement, Δt (s) is the total time of the discharge part, m (g) is the mass of the rGO material on the substrate, ΔV (V) is the value of voltage change during the discharge stage.
The specific capacitance C (F/g) value measured by CV in the three-electrode system was obtained according to the following Eq. (2) [17] , [18] , [47] : (2) C = ∫ I d V m · v · Δ V where I (A) is the value of current in CV measurement, m (g) is the mass of rGO material on the substrate, v (V/s) is the constant scan rate in CV measurement, and Δ V (V) is the potential window in CV measurement.
The proportion of capacitance-controlled and diffusion-controlled can be obtained according to Eq. (3) and Eq. (4) [48] , [49] , [50] : (3) i = k 1 v + k 2 v 1 / 2 (4) i / v 1 / 2 = k 1 v 1 / 2 + k 2 where i is the peak value of current density (A/g), v is the scan rate (V/s) in CV measurement, k 1 v and k 2 v 1/2 are the contributions of capacitance control and diffusion control, respectively. According to Eq. (4) , the k 1 and k 2 values under constant voltage are calculated, and then the quantitative contributions of the two to charge storage can be determined.
Further, the evolution of the complex capacitance Cω (F/g) is obtained through Eq. (5) to compare the performance differences between carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) materials [18] , [51] : (5) C ω = C ′ ( ω ) - j C ″ ( ω ) where C'(ω) (F/g) and C''(ω) (F/g) are the real and imaginary parts of the complex capacitance, respectively.
The real part of the complex capacitance vs. frequency, and the imaginary part of the complex capacitance vs. frequency, can be obtained from Eq. (6) and Eq. (7) [18] , [51] : (6) C ′ ( w ) = - Z ″ ( ω ) ω Z ω 2 (7) C ″ ( w ) = - Z ′ ( ω ) ω Z ω 2 where ω (rad/s) is the angular frequency, Z(ω) (Ω) is the impedance, Z'(ω) (Ω) and Z''(ω) (Ω) are the real and imaginary part of the complex capacitance, respectively.
Previous papers described the electrochemical testing method for symmetrical two-electrode cells [17] , [18] . rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI prepared using the method in Section 2.4 . Add the electrolyte (1 M H 2 SO 4 solution) and separator (glass microfiber filter) and assemble a symmetrical Swagelok cell. Electrochemical measurements of GCD and CV were based on a BioLogic SP300-SK-S electrochemical workstation.
In a two-electrode system, a single electrode's specific capacitance C sp (F/g) is found according to the following Eq. (8) and combined with the GCD discharge curve [17] , [18] , [47] . (8) C sp = 4 · C cell = 4 I · Δ t M · Δ V where C cell (F/g) is the specific capacitance of the cell, I (A) is the value of constant current in GCD measurement, Δt (s) is the total time of the discharge part, M (g) is the mass of rGO material on two electrodes, and Δ V (V) is the voltage change during discharge.
Energy density E (Wh/kg) and power density P (W/kg) were obtained using the following Eq. (9) and Eq. (10) , respectively [17] , [18] , [47] . (9) E = C sp · Δ V 2 2 × 4 × 3600 1000 (10) P = E Δ t × 3600

### 2.7. Computational method

The computational method is shown in Supporting Materials .

## 3. Results and discussion


### 3.1. rGO flexible transparent conducting films

The changes in the surface chemical composition of GO and rGO were studied by FT-IR spectroscopy in Fig. 1 , thereby confirming the reduction of OCFGs in GO by HI. The stretching vibration peaks at 1622 cm −1 and 1398 cm −1 are attributed to the bending and deformation of O − H. The C = O (carbonyl and carboxyl) stretching vibration peaks appear at 1720 cm −1 . The C − O − C (epoxy group) and the C − O (alkoxy) stretching peaks are located at 1269 cm −1 and 1060 cm −1 , respectively. The hydroxyl groups (O − H) have strong absorption bands between 3000 and 3500 cm −1 due to moisture within the hydrophilic GO sheets. Compared with GO, the characteristic bands of OCFGs of rGO almost disappear entirely. However, a more prominent peak appears at 1560 cm −1 (C = C), indicating that GO has been well reduced under the action of HI, and a larger area π conjugated structure was established in rGO [17] , [18] , [28] , [29] , [37] , [39] , [41] . The changes in structure during the reduction process are also reflected in the XRD and XPS spectra of GO and rGO. The absorption of rGO sheets at this range is observable but not as prominent as that observed for GO, likely due to the overlapping of the strong absorption of graphene sheets in this region [32] .
The changes in the surface chemical composition of GO and rGO were studied by FT-IR spectroscopy in Fig. 1 , thereby confirming the reduction of OCFGs in GO by HI. The stretching vibration peaks at 1622 cm −1 and 1398 cm −1 are attributed to the bending and deformation of O − H. The C = O (carbonyl and carboxyl) stretching vibration peaks appear at 1720 cm −1 . The C − O − C (epoxy group) and the C − O (alkoxy) stretching peaks are located at 1269 cm −1 and 1060 cm −1 , respectively. The hydroxyl groups (O − H) have strong absorption bands between 3000 and 3500 cm −1 due to moisture within the hydrophilic GO sheets. Compared with GO, the characteristic bands of OCFGs of rGO almost disappear entirely. However, a more prominent peak appears at 1560 cm −1 (C = C), indicating that GO has been well reduced under the action of HI, and a larger area π conjugated structure was established in rGO [17] , [18] , [28] , [29] , [37] , [39] , [41] . The changes in structure during the reduction process are also reflected in the XRD and XPS spectra of GO and rGO. The absorption of rGO sheets at this range is observable but not as prominent as that observed for GO, likely due to the overlapping of the strong absorption of graphene sheets in this region [32] .
The distance between two layers is an important parameter to analyze the structures of rGO materials. The comparison of the XRD patterns of GO and rGO (0.2 mL HI at 90 °C) are shown in Fig. 2 (a). The diffraction peaks around 10° and 25° are ascribed to the (0 0 2) of the graphitic plane for the GO and rGO thin films. The diffraction peak of GO is at 10.1°, which can be obtained from the Bragg equation. The d-spacing of GO is about 0.875 nm, which is much higher than the 0.34 nm of original graphite. The intercalation of OCFGs increases the interlayer spacing. After the reduction of GO by HI vapor treatment, the (0 0 2) diffraction peak shifts to 24.4°, corresponding to an interlayer spacing of around 0.364 nm. This shift in the interlayer spacing can be attributed to the reduction of the GO, where the reduction removes the OCFGs [18] , [20] , [28] , [29] , [37] , [42] , [44] . It reveals that the HI vapor treatment can effectively remove most of the OCFGs and restore the conjugated network of graphitic lattice in rGO.
The distance between two layers is an important parameter to analyze the structures of rGO materials. The comparison of the XRD patterns of GO and rGO (0.2 mL HI at 90 °C) are shown in Fig. 2 (a). The diffraction peaks around 10° and 25° are ascribed to the (0 0 2) of the graphitic plane for the GO and rGO thin films. The diffraction peak of GO is at 10.1°, which can be obtained from the Bragg equation. The d-spacing of GO is about 0.875 nm, which is much higher than the 0.34 nm of original graphite. The intercalation of OCFGs increases the interlayer spacing. After the reduction of GO by HI vapor treatment, the (0 0 2) diffraction peak shifts to 24.4°, corresponding to an interlayer spacing of around 0.364 nm. This shift in the interlayer spacing can be attributed to the reduction of the GO, where the reduction removes the OCFGs [18] , [20] , [28] , [29] , [37] , [42] , [44] . It reveals that the HI vapor treatment can effectively remove most of the OCFGs and restore the conjugated network of graphitic lattice in rGO.
TGA is a simple analytical technique to confirm the weight loss of a material as a function of temperature because of drying, decompositions that liberate gases, or chemical reduction. The TGA is used to characterize such a possibility with the GO material shown in Fig. 2 (b). It can be seen that GO and rGO differ in their thermal behavior. The rGO displays a simple linear dependence , indicating a uniform weight loss of adsorbed substances or remaining OCFGs. In contrast, the TGA curve of GO showed three steps. The GO is thermally unstable, and its initial weight was lost ∼ 7 % up to 150 °C due to the evaporation of water . The second loss of 25 % up to 250 °C might have resulted from the decomposition of OCFGs. Moreover, in the third step, the loss of 34 % at 500 °C is attributed to removing more stable OCFGs (such as carbonyl and quinone) [6] , [34] , [42] .
The GO and rGO thin films on quartz glass substrates were measured by UV/vis spectroscopy. The rGO film was fabricated by the one-step process at 90 °C and 0.2 mL of HI. As shown in Fig. 3 , GO’s UV/vis spectrum exhibits two characteristic peaks. The one maximum at around 238 nm, which is due to the π → π* transition of the aromatic C = C bond, and another weaker absorption shoulder at about 305 nm is from the n → π* transition of the C = O bond [29] , [33] , [39] . The rGO indicates a strong absorption band redshift to 270 nm in the spectrum, while the weaker shoulder peak disappears in the rGO. The change in peak position probably suggests that due to the reduction of OCFGs, a significant fraction of the conjugated structure was restored [28] , [32] . As seen from the inset optical image of Fig. 3 , the pure quartz glass substrate (top) is transparent, while the GO thin film (middle) on the quartz glass substrate gives brown color. After made the rGO thin film (bottom), the color changes to the original black color of graphite [33] , [39] .
The GO and rGO thin films on quartz glass substrates were measured by UV/vis spectroscopy. The rGO film was fabricated by the one-step process at 90 °C and 0.2 mL of HI. As shown in Fig. 3 , GO’s UV/vis spectrum exhibits two characteristic peaks. The one maximum at around 238 nm, which is due to the π → π* transition of the aromatic C = C bond, and another weaker absorption shoulder at about 305 nm is from the n → π* transition of the C = O bond [29] , [33] , [39] . The rGO indicates a strong absorption band redshift to 270 nm in the spectrum, while the weaker shoulder peak disappears in the rGO. The change in peak position probably suggests that due to the reduction of OCFGs, a significant fraction of the conjugated structure was restored [28] , [32] . As seen from the inset optical image of Fig. 3 , the pure quartz glass substrate (top) is transparent, while the GO thin film (middle) on the quartz glass substrate gives brown color. After made the rGO thin film (bottom), the color changes to the original black color of graphite [33] , [39] .
Typical characteristics of the Raman spectra of GO and rGO are shown in Fig. 4 . The main features of GO and rGO are D, G, and 2D peaks. The G peak near 1580–1600 cm −1 is due to the bond stretching of sp 2 carbons in the ring and chain, while the D peak near 1330–1350 cm −1 originates from the breathing mode of the six-membered ring, that is, activated by defects. The 2D peak at approximately 2700 cm −1 is a Raman active overtone not activated by defects. [17] , [18] , [36] , [39] , [40] , [42] , [47] , [52] , [53] . In the Raman spectrum of GO, due to the introduction of OCFGs, the sp 2 carbon atoms of the crystal lattice are chemically functionalized, thus introducing defects. The G and D bands appear broad peaks at 1581 cm −1 and 1343 cm −1 , respectively, and the 2D band appears a broader and weaker peak at 2682 cm −1 . rGO appears D, G, and 2D peak signals at the same positions mentioned above, and all full width at half maximum become narrower, and the peak heights of G and 2D peaks are enhanced after being reduced by HI. The I D /I G of rGO (0.77) shows a lower value than that of GO (1.24), which is attributed to the increased degree of ordering of the material due to the removal of OCFGs contained by GO, and the conjugated structure was restored. In addition, the value of I D /I G corresponds to the distance between defects on the material surface. The I D /I G ratio of 0.7 may correspond to two different results: the distance between defects at a high defect level is 0.5 nm, or between defects at a low defect level is 11.3 nm. As for the rGO thin film (0.2 mL HI at 90 °C), the D and G peaks are narrow, and strong 2D narrow peaks correspond to lower degrees of defects. The area between defects in the rGO thin film corresponding to L D = 11.3 nm is about 110.58 nm 2 , and the defect density is less than 0.03 % [30] , [52] , [53] . It shows that HI can effectively reduce GO and obtain a clean surface material similar to pure graphene [30] . Note that the weak peak at 1090 cm −1 originates from the quartz glass of the substrate. This presence may be attributed to the good transmittance of GO and rGO films, which allows the peak corresponding to the substrate to be displayed in the Raman characterization results ( Fig. S1 ).
Typical characteristics of the Raman spectra of GO and rGO are shown in Fig. 4 . The main features of GO and rGO are D, G, and 2D peaks. The G peak near 1580–1600 cm −1 is due to the bond stretching of sp 2 carbons in the ring and chain, while the D peak near 1330–1350 cm −1 originates from the breathing mode of the six-membered ring, that is, activated by defects. The 2D peak at approximately 2700 cm −1 is a Raman active overtone not activated by defects. [17] , [18] , [36] , [39] , [40] , [42] , [47] , [52] , [53] . In the Raman spectrum of GO, due to the introduction of OCFGs, the sp 2 carbon atoms of the crystal lattice are chemically functionalized, thus introducing defects. The G and D bands appear broad peaks at 1581 cm −1 and 1343 cm −1 , respectively, and the 2D band appears a broader and weaker peak at 2682 cm −1 . rGO appears D, G, and 2D peak signals at the same positions mentioned above, and all full width at half maximum become narrower, and the peak heights of G and 2D peaks are enhanced after being reduced by HI. The I D /I G of rGO (0.77) shows a lower value than that of GO (1.24), which is attributed to the increased degree of ordering of the material due to the removal of OCFGs contained by GO, and the conjugated structure was restored. In addition, the value of I D /I G corresponds to the distance between defects on the material surface. The I D /I G ratio of 0.7 may correspond to two different results: the distance between defects at a high defect level is 0.5 nm, or between defects at a low defect level is 11.3 nm. As for the rGO thin film (0.2 mL HI at 90 °C), the D and G peaks are narrow, and strong 2D narrow peaks correspond to lower degrees of defects. The area between defects in the rGO thin film corresponding to L D = 11.3 nm is about 110.58 nm 2 , and the defect density is less than 0.03 % [30] , [52] , [53] . It shows that HI can effectively reduce GO and obtain a clean surface material similar to pure graphene [30] . Note that the weak peak at 1090 cm −1 originates from the quartz glass of the substrate. This presence may be attributed to the good transmittance of GO and rGO films, which allows the peak corresponding to the substrate to be displayed in the Raman characterization results ( Fig. S1 ).
The STEM image of the rGO flake (0.2 mL HI at 90 °C) is shown in Fig. 5 (a). The ordered graphite lattices are visible in the STEM image. This characterization gives additional information about the average interlayer distance of the layers d 002 for rGO material, whose value is 0.357 nm (14 layers in a ∼ 5 nm stack), which is similar to that of the d-spacing (0.364 nm) obtained from XRD measurements ( Fig. 2 (a)) [29] , [42] . The crystallographic structure of the graphene sheets was characterized by the SAED method. The SAED pattern at the periphery of the rGO sheet in Fig. 5 (b) shows a graphite crystal structure with hexagonal symmetry, indicating that HI successfully fully restored the graphene conjugated structure in rGO. However, the occurrence of spots with more than 6 bright hexagons can be observed, indicating that the rGO sheets may contain oxidation-induced clustered defects. Since these clusters were not fully restored into the hexagonal graphene framework, the rGO sheets contained incompletely reduced OCFGs, consistent with FT-IR and XPS's conclusions [28] , [29] , [41] , [42] .
The STEM image of the rGO flake (0.2 mL HI at 90 °C) is shown in Fig. 5 (a). The ordered graphite lattices are visible in the STEM image. This characterization gives additional information about the average interlayer distance of the layers d 002 for rGO material, whose value is 0.357 nm (14 layers in a ∼ 5 nm stack), which is similar to that of the d-spacing (0.364 nm) obtained from XRD measurements ( Fig. 2 (a)) [29] , [42] . The crystallographic structure of the graphene sheets was characterized by the SAED method. The SAED pattern at the periphery of the rGO sheet in Fig. 5 (b) shows a graphite crystal structure with hexagonal symmetry, indicating that HI successfully fully restored the graphene conjugated structure in rGO. However, the occurrence of spots with more than 6 bright hexagons can be observed, indicating that the rGO sheets may contain oxidation-induced clustered defects. Since these clusters were not fully restored into the hexagonal graphene framework, the rGO sheets contained incompletely reduced OCFGs, consistent with FT-IR and XPS's conclusions [28] , [29] , [41] , [42] .
To gain information on the composition of GO and rGO sheets to evaluate the removal of OCFGs by HI, X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were performed to characterize the degree of oxygen species present. The C/O atomic concentration ratio of samples are shown in Table S1 . With the addition of 0.2 mL reducing agent HI, the C/O ratio increased from 3.46 (GO/slide glass) to 11.36 (rGO/slide glass 0.2 mL HI at 90 °C). Fig. S2 (a, c) show the C 1 s XPS spectrum of the GO/slide glass and rGO/slide glass (0.2 mL HI at 90 °C). Three different binding energy peaks centered in C 1 s at 284.8, 286.9, and 288.8 eV in C 1 s are observed, corresponding to the non-oxygenated carbon (C = C/ C–C), epoxide (C–O) / hydroxyl (C–OH), and carboxyl (COOH) [5] , [20] , [22] , [29] , [36] , [43] , [53] , [54] , [55] , [56] . The peak intensity of C = C/ C–C increases with the 0.2 mL HI used, and the peak area ratio rises from 53.02 % to 93.03 %. The peak intensity of C–O also decreases, and the peak area ratio drops from 43.07 % to 4.10 %. It shows that the reducing agent HI can effectively reduce GO and restore the graphene conjugated structure.
Fig. 6 shows the optical images of the transparent PET substrate (a) and the rGO thin films on the PET substrates (b-d). After making rGO film on the PET substrates, the substrates with different transmittance change from light gray to the original black color of rGO. Compared to the pure PET substrate, indicating fabrication of conductive rGO thin films on the substrates. The GO aqueous suspension dispersion was sprayed onto a preheated substrate using the airbrush system with CO 2 as a carrier gas to reduce the atmosphere of HI. The input amounts of HI and the substrates' preheating temperature varied from 0.05 to 1 mL and 90 to 200 °C, respectively. Single-factor experiments with different HI dosages, heating temperatures, and substrate materials were performed to depict the relationship between the sheet resistance ( R s ) and transmittance (550 nm) of rGO thin films under different conditions are shown in Fig. 7 .
Fig. 6 shows the optical images of the transparent PET substrate (a) and the rGO thin films on the PET substrates (b-d). After making rGO film on the PET substrates, the substrates with different transmittance change from light gray to the original black color of rGO. Compared to the pure PET substrate, indicating fabrication of conductive rGO thin films on the substrates. The GO aqueous suspension dispersion was sprayed onto a preheated substrate using the airbrush system with CO 2 as a carrier gas to reduce the atmosphere of HI. The input amounts of HI and the substrates' preheating temperature varied from 0.05 to 1 mL and 90 to 200 °C, respectively. Single-factor experiments with different HI dosages, heating temperatures, and substrate materials were performed to depict the relationship between the sheet resistance ( R s ) and transmittance (550 nm) of rGO thin films under different conditions are shown in Fig. 7 .
As shown in Fig. 7 (a), the relationship between the R s and transmittance of the rGO thin film on the slide glass substrate with different amounts of HI at a constant temperature of 90 °C was investigated. When 0.05 mL HI was used in the fabrication of rGO thin film, the sheet resistance was higher than other quantities, which may be due to the rGO not being completely reduced, resulting in high resistivity of the material. When the dosage of HI increased to 0.1 mL, the obtained R s values decreased. The lowest sheet resistance and highest transmittance were obtained when 0.2 mL of HI was used. However, as the amount of HI used continued to increase (0.3, 0.6, and 1 mL), there was no significant difference in R s values. Fig. 7 (b) shows the corresponding relationship between R s and transmittance of rGO films at different processing temperatures of 90, 100, 120, 150, and 200 °C under the conditions of a glass slide carrier and a constant input of 0.2 mL of HI. It can be observed that the results at 90 and 100 °C are similar. However, as the treatment temperature continues to increase, the R s value obtained becomes higher. The results show that in this system, too high heating temperature (120 °C and above) will cause the reduction of GO to be ineffective. The main reason may be that when the heating temperature is higher than 120 °C, which is close to the boiling point of HI (127 °C), it is easy to cause HI to volatilize and move out of the reaction system, resulting in incomplete reduction of GO, which in turn leads to a higher R s . As shown in Fig. 7 (c), under the conditions of a heating temperature of 90 °C and a constant input of HI of 0.2 mL, the corresponding relationship between R s and transmittance using different materials (slides glass, quartz glass, PI, and PET) as substrates. The results show that the R s and transmittance of rGO thin films prepared by this method are not affected by changes in substrate materials. The broad applicability of this method is effectively illustrated. The prepared flexible transparent conductive film rGO/PET 0.2 mL HI exhibited a conductivity lower than 1000 Ω/sq and a transparency of 80 % on a PET substrate. In addition, the experimental results show that R s decreases with the decrease of transmittance, which can be controlled by changing process parameters such as GO concentration and spraying time to meet the production needs of different products.
In Fig. S3 , the prepared rGO/PET transparent conductive film was subjected to flexibility-related tests, including 30–180° bending and winding tests. No visible cracks appeared on the surface of the film. To test the mechanical flexibility of the rGO/PET transparent conductive film, a self-made instrument was used to conduct a bending test with a bending angle of approximately 150°. Fig. S4 shows the change in sheet resistance expressed as a function of R/R 0 and the number of bending cycles, where R 0 is the initial sheet resistance of the rGO/PET transparent conductive film and R is the sheet resistance after bending. The specific ratio and error values are shown in Table S2 . The rGO/PET transparent conductive film still has excellent resistance retention and mechanical flexibility after 1000 bending cycles.
Table S3 compares this method with previously reported rGO transparent conductive films. In this work, rGO flexible transparent conductive films were prepared through a mild one-step method and exhibited superior transmittance and low sheet resistance. This method does not require the use of high temperature methods and toxic or dangerous reducing agent, which improves the safety of the production process and is relatively environmentally friendly. In addition, the coating and reduction of GO on the substrate surface are performed simultaneously, avoiding the production step of secondary transfer and reducing the economic cost of production. At the same time, this method can be carried out under open environmental conditions without requiring harsh preparation environment. These advantages create conditions for large-scale industrial production of this method.

### 3.2. rGO-based film materials

As shown in Fig. 8 , the microsurface morphology of carbon cloth (CC), GO/CC, and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI at 90 °C) was studied through FE-SEM characterization. It can be clearly observed in Fig. 8 (a) that the surface of the carbon cloth presents a clean and smooth carbon fiber surface. In Fig. 8 (b), GO forms a thin film between the carbon fibers after spraying the GO dispersion. Under the microscopic conditions of the 1 μm scale, GO is evenly attached to the surface of the carbon fibers. In Fig. 8 (c-g), different amounts of HI are used to reduce GO, and rGO still exhibits a uniformly dispersed state of film-like or flake-coated carbon fibers, and the surface of rGO is relatively smooth and neat. It shows that HI can effectively remove OCFGs on the GO, forming a clean surface like pure graphene without the defective structure of thermal reduction [30] .
As shown in Fig. 8 , the microsurface morphology of carbon cloth (CC), GO/CC, and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI at 90 °C) was studied through FE-SEM characterization. It can be clearly observed in Fig. 8 (a) that the surface of the carbon cloth presents a clean and smooth carbon fiber surface. In Fig. 8 (b), GO forms a thin film between the carbon fibers after spraying the GO dispersion. Under the microscopic conditions of the 1 μm scale, GO is evenly attached to the surface of the carbon fibers. In Fig. 8 (c-g), different amounts of HI are used to reduce GO, and rGO still exhibits a uniformly dispersed state of film-like or flake-coated carbon fibers, and the surface of rGO is relatively smooth and neat. It shows that HI can effectively remove OCFGs on the GO, forming a clean surface like pure graphene without the defective structure of thermal reduction [30] .
Fig. S5 shows the FE-SEM morphology of the surface and cross-section of rGO/PF 0.01 mL HI (90 °C) using platinum foil as the substrate. As can be observed in Fig. S5 (a), rGO/PF 0.01 mL HI has a smooth and flat surface morphology without large-scale wrinkles and cracks, indicating that this method has excellent stability. Fig. S5 (b-d) shows the morphological characteristics of the rGO/PF 0.01 mL HI cross-section at different magnifications. The cross-section of the sample exhibits a layered structure formed by the accumulation of rGO thin films. The film thickness was continuously accumulated by spraying GO dispersion while completing the reduction step. The characteristics of the GO sheet were used to prepare a smooth film with uniform thickness distribution and high adhesion between materials. This method eliminates the need for a secondary transfer step, which may cause uneven material distribution and deterioration of surface flatness. Fig. S6 and Table S4 show the EDX spectra and atomic concentration results of carbon cloth, GO/CC, rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI), and rGO/PF (0.01–0.02 mL HI). As the amount of HI added increases, the O atom concentration in the sample decreases from 17.89 % (GO/CC) to 3.96 % (rGO/CC 0.04 mL HI), indicating that HI effectively reduces GO. The rGO thin film on the platinum foil as a substrate also showed the same trend.
The chemical structures of CC, GO/CC, rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI), and rGO/PF (0.005–0.02 mL HI) series samples were characterized by XPS. The full-spectrum analysis of CC, GO/CC, and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) are shown in Fig. S7 , and the peak area ratio of C/O is listed in Table S5 . As the usage of HI increases, the content of O element in rGO/CC (27.36–15.01 %, 0.005–0.04 mL HI) decreases significantly compared with GO/CC (29.65 %). At the same time, the C/O ratio increased from 2.37 to 2.65–5.66, indicating that the reduction degree of rGO increased with the increase in HI usage. The C 1 s spectra of GO/CC and rGO/CC samples are shown in Fig. 9 . The C 1 s XPS spectrum can be fitted into three components: including C = C/ C–C (284.8 eV), epoxide C–O/hydroxyl C–OH (286.9 eV) and carboxyl O–C = O (288.8 eV) group. Accurate individual quantification of epoxides and hydroxyl groups is challenging due to similar binding energies. Therefore, their XPS peaks are discussed together [5] , [20] , [22] , [29] , [36] , [43] , [53] , [54] , [55] , [56] . The peak intensity of C = C/ C–C increases with the increase in the amount of HI used, and the peak area ratio rises from 54.30 % to 83.68 %. The peak intensity of C–O decreases with the increase in HI usage, and the peak area ratio drops from 42.30 % to 14.05 %. It shows that the reducing agent HI can effectively reduce GO and change the content of OCFGs on the sample’s surface. It is worth noting that the peak intensity of O–C = O did not change significantly with the increase in HI usage, and the peak area ratio remained between 3.40 % and 2.27 %.
The chemical structures of CC, GO/CC, rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI), and rGO/PF (0.005–0.02 mL HI) series samples were characterized by XPS. The full-spectrum analysis of CC, GO/CC, and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) are shown in Fig. S7 , and the peak area ratio of C/O is listed in Table S5 . As the usage of HI increases, the content of O element in rGO/CC (27.36–15.01 %, 0.005–0.04 mL HI) decreases significantly compared with GO/CC (29.65 %). At the same time, the C/O ratio increased from 2.37 to 2.65–5.66, indicating that the reduction degree of rGO increased with the increase in HI usage. The C 1 s spectra of GO/CC and rGO/CC samples are shown in Fig. 9 . The C 1 s XPS spectrum can be fitted into three components: including C = C/ C–C (284.8 eV), epoxide C–O/hydroxyl C–OH (286.9 eV) and carboxyl O–C = O (288.8 eV) group. Accurate individual quantification of epoxides and hydroxyl groups is challenging due to similar binding energies. Therefore, their XPS peaks are discussed together [5] , [20] , [22] , [29] , [36] , [43] , [53] , [54] , [55] , [56] . The peak intensity of C = C/ C–C increases with the increase in the amount of HI used, and the peak area ratio rises from 54.30 % to 83.68 %. The peak intensity of C–O decreases with the increase in HI usage, and the peak area ratio drops from 42.30 % to 14.05 %. It shows that the reducing agent HI can effectively reduce GO and change the content of OCFGs on the sample’s surface. It is worth noting that the peak intensity of O–C = O did not change significantly with the increase in HI usage, and the peak area ratio remained between 3.40 % and 2.27 %.
The O 1 s XPS spectra of GO/CC and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) samples are shown in Fig. 10 . The O 1 s peak can be divided into three peaks around 530.5 eV (C = O, carbonyl group), 532.1 eV (C–O–C, epoxy/C–OH, hydroxyl group), and 533.5 eV (COOH, carboxyl group). [17] , [18] , [37] . As the usage of HI increases, the epoxy/hydroxyl groups are greatly removed, and the peak area ratio decreases from 72.24 % to 52.25 %. At the same time, the peak area ratio of the C = O group gradually decreases as the amount of HI added increases, indicating that HI as a reducing agent can effectively reduce the C = O groups. However, the peak intensity of COOH increases with the increase in HI dosage, and the peak area ratio rises from 10.55 % to 42.47 %. Fig. S2 (b, d) also confirm this result. After adding 0.2 mL HI, the peak area ratio of COOH increased from 5.37 % (GO/slide glass) to 75.79 % (rGO/slide glass 0.2 mL HI at 90 °C). In conjunction with the conclusion of C 1 s, the COOH group may be difficult to reduce by HI. As the reduction degree of rGO increases, the peak area of COOH groups in O 1 s gradually increases. In addition, Fig. S8 illustrates that the surface of the pretreated carbon cloth is also oxidized to a certain extent. The introduction of OCFGs enhances the hydrophilicity of the carbon cloth, which is beneficial to the contact and coating of the GO dispersion on the surface of the carbon cloth. In Fig. S9 , the XPS spectrum of GO/PF and rGO/PF (0.005–0.02 mL HI) also shows a consistent trend with the GO/CC and rGO/CC samples. The water contact angle tests in Fig. S10 show that as the amount of HI added increases, the water contact angle of the sample gradually increases, which indicates that the increase in the degree of reduction of rGO reduces the surface hydrophilicity . The increase in water contact angle indicates the reduction of OCFGs on the GO surface and the repair of the graphene structure, resulting in the enhancement of hydrophobicity [57] , [58] .
The O 1 s XPS spectra of GO/CC and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) samples are shown in Fig. 10 . The O 1 s peak can be divided into three peaks around 530.5 eV (C = O, carbonyl group), 532.1 eV (C–O–C, epoxy/C–OH, hydroxyl group), and 533.5 eV (COOH, carboxyl group). [17] , [18] , [37] . As the usage of HI increases, the epoxy/hydroxyl groups are greatly removed, and the peak area ratio decreases from 72.24 % to 52.25 %. At the same time, the peak area ratio of the C = O group gradually decreases as the amount of HI added increases, indicating that HI as a reducing agent can effectively reduce the C = O groups. However, the peak intensity of COOH increases with the increase in HI dosage, and the peak area ratio rises from 10.55 % to 42.47 %. Fig. S2 (b, d) also confirm this result. After adding 0.2 mL HI, the peak area ratio of COOH increased from 5.37 % (GO/slide glass) to 75.79 % (rGO/slide glass 0.2 mL HI at 90 °C). In conjunction with the conclusion of C 1 s, the COOH group may be difficult to reduce by HI. As the reduction degree of rGO increases, the peak area of COOH groups in O 1 s gradually increases. In addition, Fig. S8 illustrates that the surface of the pretreated carbon cloth is also oxidized to a certain extent. The introduction of OCFGs enhances the hydrophilicity of the carbon cloth, which is beneficial to the contact and coating of the GO dispersion on the surface of the carbon cloth. In Fig. S9 , the XPS spectrum of GO/PF and rGO/PF (0.005–0.02 mL HI) also shows a consistent trend with the GO/CC and rGO/CC samples. The water contact angle tests in Fig. S10 show that as the amount of HI added increases, the water contact angle of the sample gradually increases, which indicates that the increase in the degree of reduction of rGO reduces the surface hydrophilicity . The increase in water contact angle indicates the reduction of OCFGs on the GO surface and the repair of the graphene structure, resulting in the enhancement of hydrophobicity [57] , [58] .
The rGO materials were used as electrodes in SCs to evaluate one possible application for electrical energy storage . In the three-electrode systems, GCD, CV, and EIS tests were performed on carbon cloth, rGO/CC, and rGO/PF samples to evaluate the electrochemical performance of the materials. Fig. S11 (a) shows that under GCD test conditions with a current density of 1 A/g, as the HI addition amount increases from 0.005 to 0.04 mL, the specific capacitance of the rGO/CC sample first increases from 51.0 to 248.0 F/g, and then decreases to 222.0 F/g. Adding too much HI will remove excess OCFGs on rGO, leading to deep repair of the conjugated structure and reducing the pseudocapacitive sites of the material, resulting in a lower specific capacitance value [18] . The CV results at a scan rate of 5 mV/s also show the same trend in Fig. S11 (b). Notably, rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI exhibited the highest specific capacitance. Table S6 shows the specific capacitance results of different samples. Figs. S12–S16 and Fig. 11 show the changes in the energy storage capacity of carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) as SCs electrode materials under different current density and scan speed conditions. At the same time, 20,000 charge–discharge cycle tests at a current density of 50 A/g were performed to verify the electrochemical stability of the prepared material. The specific capacitance results under different current densities and sweep speed tests are shown in Table S7 , and the specific capacitance values and retention rates of the cyclic charge and discharge experiments are conducted in Table S8 .
The rGO materials were used as electrodes in SCs to evaluate one possible application for electrical energy storage . In the three-electrode systems, GCD, CV, and EIS tests were performed on carbon cloth, rGO/CC, and rGO/PF samples to evaluate the electrochemical performance of the materials. Fig. S11 (a) shows that under GCD test conditions with a current density of 1 A/g, as the HI addition amount increases from 0.005 to 0.04 mL, the specific capacitance of the rGO/CC sample first increases from 51.0 to 248.0 F/g, and then decreases to 222.0 F/g. Adding too much HI will remove excess OCFGs on rGO, leading to deep repair of the conjugated structure and reducing the pseudocapacitive sites of the material, resulting in a lower specific capacitance value [18] . The CV results at a scan rate of 5 mV/s also show the same trend in Fig. S11 (b). Notably, rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI exhibited the highest specific capacitance. Table S6 shows the specific capacitance results of different samples. Figs. S12–S16 and Fig. 11 show the changes in the energy storage capacity of carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) as SCs electrode materials under different current density and scan speed conditions. At the same time, 20,000 charge–discharge cycle tests at a current density of 50 A/g were performed to verify the electrochemical stability of the prepared material. The specific capacitance results under different current densities and sweep speed tests are shown in Table S7 , and the specific capacitance values and retention rates of the cyclic charge and discharge experiments are conducted in Table S8 .
Figs. S12–S16 (a) and Fig. 11 (a) show the GCD curves of carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) at 1 to 25 A/g current densities. Fig. 11 (b) and Table S7 show the materials’ specific capacitance values ( C ). The specific capacitance of rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI material is 248.0 F/g, which is higher than 24.6 F/g of carbon cloth and 51.0–222.0 F/g of rGO/CC (0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.04 mL HI) materials at 1 A/g. The typical triangular GCD curve and insignificant electrode potential drop reflect the low diffusion resistance of electrolyte ions in the system [11] , [21] , [24] , [59] . With the increase of current density, the C of materials decreases, which is caused by the system's internal resistance and the electrolyte's concentration polarization . It is worth noting that the experimental results show that the C retention rate of the rGO/CC sample increases with the increase in the degree of reduction, from 67.16 % (0.005 mL HI) to 79.10 % (0.04 mL HI). It may be due to the increase in the reduction degree of rGO that the OCFGs on the surface of the material are removed, and the graphene conjugated structure is repaired, which increases the conductivity of the rGO material, thereby improving the C retention rate under high current density . The rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI (183.5 F/g, 73.99 %) also had a high C retention at 25 A/g.
Additionally, the CV curves for carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) at 5–200 mV/s scan rates are shown in Figs. S12–S16 (b) and Fig. 11 (c). Fig. 11 (d) and Table S7 show the materials’ specific capacitance ( C sp ) values. The rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI material showed a maximum C sp of 433.2 F/g at 5 mV/s, while the carbon cloth’s C sp was only 41.3 F/g, and the rGO/CC (0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.04 mL HI) materials C sp was 88.7–405.0 F/g. The CV curves of all samples at different scan rates are approximately rectangular, reflecting the effective double-layer formation and high performance of carbon cloth and rGO/CC materials when charging and discharging at a wide range of scan rates [24] , [35] . The CV curve exhibits redox peaks at 0.35 and 0.4 V, caused by the residual OCFGs on the surface of rGO/CC serving as energy storage pseudocapacitance sites. All rGO/CC materials maintain high specific capacitance retention rates at high scan rates, indicating that the prepared materials have high reversibility and efficient ion transport capabilities [24] . In the CV test at a scan speed of 200 mV/s, the specific capacitance retention rate of the rGO/CC samples first decreased and then increased as the degree of reduction increased, from 83.20 % (0.005 mL HI) to 75.64 % (0.02 mL HI), and then increased to 82.17 % (0.04 mL HI). The possible reason is that the current collector carbon cloth has an excellent specific capacitance retention rate (89.73 %, 200 mV/s). At the stage when the specific capacitance value obtained by rGO/CC films (0.005–0.01 mL HI) are low, it affects the sample’s specific capacitance retention rate at high scan speed. Further reduction improved the specific capacitance retention of rGO/CC films (0.02–0.04 mL HI) at a scan rate of 200 mV/s. This result indicates that the results of the CV test may be affected by the current collector material. The rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI (336.8 F/g, 77.74 %) also showed high specific capacitance retention at 200 mV/s.
For the CV curve of carbon cloth, weak redox peaks appear at 0.1 and 0.2 V, which is caused by the possible introduction of nitrogen functional groups on the surface as energy storage pseudocapacitance sites during the pretreatment process [60] . To verify this conjecture, as shown in Fig. S17 (a), the CV test of untreated carbon cloth and the carbon cloth used in this study was compared at 200 mV/s. It can be seen that the CV curve of the untreated carbon cloth presents an ideal the state is rectangular, without any redox peaks, and the specific capacitance is much smaller than the carbon cloth used in this experiment. After pretreatment with nitric acid and sulfuric acid , two pairs of redox peaks appeared on the carbon cloth at 0.1/0.2 V and 0.35/0.4 V, respectively, which were attributed to N groups and O groups. At the same time, the XPS characterization of carbon cloth is shown in Fig. S17 (b). An obvious N1s diffraction peak appears at 400 eV, indicating that N groups are introduced into the carbon cloth and serve as pseudocapacitive sites in electrochemical tests.
The electrochemical stability of SCs is also the key to investigating the performance of electrode materials. Figs. S11–S16 (c, d) and Table S8 show the stability curves and specific capacitance value for carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) measured using GCD at 50 A/g. The specific capacitance retention rates of carbon cloth and rGO/CC after 20,000 charge and discharge cycles are higher than 93.26 %. This result shows that carbon cloth and rGO/CC materials have excellent charge–discharge cycle stability as SCs electrode materials. Experimental results showed that the specific capacitance retention rate of rGO/CC materials first decreased and then increased. However, the specific capacitance retention rate of the carbon cloth continued to drop to 96.04 % during the charge and discharge cycles, which eliminated interference caused by the external test environment during the test (such as increased electrolyte concentration and dissolution of electrode clip metal). The reason may be that the performance of the rGO/CC materials first decays as the number of charge and discharge cycles increases. As the cycle test proceeds, the electrolyte gradually wets the internal space of the rGO/CC material, thereby expanding the accessible specific surface area between the electrolyte and the interior of the material. At the same time, as the cycle stability test proceeds, more OCFGs on the surface of the rGO/CC electrode material are activated or introduced. These are the main reasons for the improvement in capacitance retention of electrode materials [17] , [18] , [31] .
As shown in Figs. S18 and S19 (a), the capacitive-controlled process involving carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL) achieved 77–95 % of the total stored charge at 10 mV/s (pink area) [48] , [49] , [50] . The results of the capacitive contribution ratio for carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL) initially decrease and then increase. Carbon cloth exhibits the highest capacitance contribution rate of 95 %. With varying degrees of rGO, the capacitance contribution rate of the rGO/CC film decreases to 77 %. However, as the degree of reduction increases, the capacitance control rate increases to 93 %. This observation suggests that the results of the capacitance contribution ratio test could be influenced by the selection of current collector material. The higher diffusion contribution of rGO/CC films can be attributed to the pseudocapacitance generated by OCFGs. Moreover, as shown in Fig. S19 (b), it is can be observed that the capacitance contribution increases with the scan rate, attributed to the occurrence of the capacitance control process at the electrode surface .
Fig. 12 shows the Nyquist plots of carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) materials. All curves show approximate straight lines in the low-frequency region and inconspicuous arcs in the high-frequency region. The result is that the Nyquist plot curve is approximately parallel to the imaginary - Z '' axis in the low frequency region, which reflects the Warburg diffusion impedance of the electrolyte in the material. The angle between the curves of carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) materials in the low frequency region and the frequency axis is close to 90°, indicating that the electrolyte ions have low diffusion resistance and nearly to ideal capacitive behavior inside the electrode material. [11] , [17] , [18] , [21] , [24] , [51] , [59] . The sum of the resistance of the electrolyte, the internal resistance of the material, and the interface resistance between the material and the current collector are represented by the intercept of the semicircle in the high-frequency region on the Z' axis, which is called the equivalent series resistance (ESR). The ESR of all materials in 1 M H 2 SO 4 is less than 1 Ω, with lower ESR leading to a smaller decrease in electrode potential, consistent with the observations in the GCD results [59] . The axis intercept in the high-frequency range corresponds to series resistance (R s ). The impedance plots formed a semicircle in the high-frequency area and a straight line in the low-frequency area. The semicircle diameter determines the charge transport resistance (R ct ) at the contact interface between the electrode and electrolyte solution. The rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI display a lower R s (0.81 Ω) and R ct (0.27 Ω) in the Table S9 [50] , [57] , [58] , [61] .
Fig. 12 shows the Nyquist plots of carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) materials. All curves show approximate straight lines in the low-frequency region and inconspicuous arcs in the high-frequency region. The result is that the Nyquist plot curve is approximately parallel to the imaginary - Z '' axis in the low frequency region, which reflects the Warburg diffusion impedance of the electrolyte in the material. The angle between the curves of carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) materials in the low frequency region and the frequency axis is close to 90°, indicating that the electrolyte ions have low diffusion resistance and nearly to ideal capacitive behavior inside the electrode material. [11] , [17] , [18] , [21] , [24] , [51] , [59] . The sum of the resistance of the electrolyte, the internal resistance of the material, and the interface resistance between the material and the current collector are represented by the intercept of the semicircle in the high-frequency region on the Z' axis, which is called the equivalent series resistance (ESR). The ESR of all materials in 1 M H 2 SO 4 is less than 1 Ω, with lower ESR leading to a smaller decrease in electrode potential, consistent with the observations in the GCD results [59] . The axis intercept in the high-frequency range corresponds to series resistance (R s ). The impedance plots formed a semicircle in the high-frequency area and a straight line in the low-frequency area. The semicircle diameter determines the charge transport resistance (R ct ) at the contact interface between the electrode and electrolyte solution. The rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI display a lower R s (0.81 Ω) and R ct (0.27 Ω) in the Table S9 [50] , [57] , [58] , [61] .
Fig. S20 shows the phase angle value of carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) is ∼ 84°, showing the Bode phase diagram of ideal capacitance close to 90° [17] , [18] , [51] , [62] . The real capacitance C' shows the maximum specific capacitance value at a frequency of 0.1 Hz, and the peak of the imaginary capacitance C'' versus the frequency (Hz) curve corresponds to the relaxation time ( t 0 ) of the material [63] . Fig. S21 shows the real capacitance C′ versus the frequency curve. The real capacitance corresponding to carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005–0.04 mL HI) materials at 0.1 Hz is close to the measured value of GCD and shows the same trend. The imaginary part of the capacitance C'' corresponds to the energy dissipation of the irreversible process. The corresponding relationship between C'' and frequency is shown in Fig. S22 . The lossy capacitance of SCs exhibits a maximum value at frequency f 0 , and the t 0 is also called the time constant, and its value is the reciprocal of f 0 . The equivalent circuit model of a single SCs consists of a resistor ( R ) and a capacitor ( C ) connected in series. The t 0 is considered to be the time required to charge a capacitor to 63.2 % of its full capacity at constant voltage, and its value is equal to the product of R and C . The t 0 can also be understood as the time when SCs change from resistive to capacitive behavior [18] . The corresponding t 0 for all materials is very similar: 0.10 s for carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005 mL HI) and 0.18 s for rGO/CC (0.01–0.04 mL HI). Since rGO/CC (0.01–0.04 mL HI) has a large specific capacitance, it has a larger t 0 than carbon cloth and rGO/CC (0.005 mL HI) when the material resistance is approximative. It is much lower than the results reported in the existing literature (8.7 s for carbon materials, 8.5 s for carbon–metal oxide materials, and 2.1 s for COF aerogels) [51] , [62] , [63] .
Table S10 compares previously reported rGO materials and rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI) materials prepared by this method. Compared with other studies, this method prepared rGO/CC through a gentle and convenient one-step method, demonstrating superior electrochemical properties as a SCs electrode material. The rGO/CC material realizes reduction while spraying GO onto the surface of the current collector, avoiding secondary transfer of materials, and is suitable for large-scale industrial processes. At the same time, milder HI is used as a reducing agent to effectively reduce GO while avoiding the use of toxic or dangerous reducing agents. In addition, no high-temperature treatment is required, and the production process can be realized in an open environment. By changing the amount of reducing agent HI added, the content of OCFGs on the surface of rGO is controlled, effectively reducing the rGO material while retaining the OCFGs as pseudocapacitive sites, which helps to increase the specific capacitance of the material. According to the electrochemical test results, the rGO/CC material prepared by this method has low ion diffusion resistance, abundant pseudocapacitive sites, lower ESR, and thus excellent electrochemical performance.
The performance of rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI) as an electrode material was further explored with SCs assembled with symmetric electrodes. Fig. S23 (a) shows the GCD curve of rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI) at 1 to 25 A/g. The typical symmetrical triangle GCD curve and low electrode potential drop reflect the excellent electrochemical reversibility of rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI) material and the low diffusion resistance of electrolyte ions in the system [11] , [18] , [59] . The SCs assembled with rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI) symmetric electrodes obtained a specific capacitance of 134.2 F/g at 1 A/g. Fig. S23 (b) shows that the CV curve of rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI) exhibits a rectangular curve at scan rates from 10 to 200 mV/s, indicating that the material exhibits perfect EDLC behavior. The specific capacitance of rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI) material is 329.3 F/g at 10 mV/s. In addition, the Ragone plots of rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI), reported rGO materials and commercial SCs carbon materials are shown in Fig. S24 . The rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI) sample achieved a high energy density of 4.7 Wh/kg at a power density of 250 W/kg (3.6 Wh/kg at 6250 W/kg), exhibiting electrochemistry performance comparable to commercial SCs. Compared with rGO materials reported by other researchers, this study used a one-step method to prepare rGO/CC materials, avoiding toxic and high-risk reducing agents, shortening the reduction time, and eliminating the need for a secondary current collector transfer step. Table S11 summarizes the electrochemical performance comparisons between rGO/CC (0.03 mL HI), commercial SCs electrode carbon materials, and reported rGO materials, indicating that rGO/CC materials exhibit excellent performance as SCs electrodes.

### 3.3. Reaction mechanism

Figs. S25 and S26 show that five GO models containing different OCFGs with a single-layer structure were established. In Fig. 13 , Fig. 14 , the HI molecular adsorption model shows that HI molecules are placed above the GO structures containing different OCFGs, and the corresponding calculation results of the adsorption energy are marked. The distances of the bond and between the atoms (unit: Å) during the adsorption process are shown in Tables S12–S16 . As shown in Fig. 13 , the adsorption energies ( E ads ) of HI molecules on structures containing –C–O–C– (epoxy group), –OH (hydroxyl group), and C = O (carbonyl group) on the GO surface are −0.76, −0.45 and −6.51 eV respectively. The HI molecules adsorbed on the surface of GO containing carbonyl group have the maximum adsorption energy, the H–I bond is broken, H contacts O on the carbonyl group to form a bond, and the distance between H and I from 1.650 Å increases to 2.506 Å, C = O undergoes double bond cleavage to form C–O, and the C–O bond is stretched to 1.471 Å. At the same time, during the adsorption process of HI molecules on the structure containing epoxy group and hydroxyl group on the GO surface, both the H–I (1.652 Å and 1.685 Å) and C–O (1.484 Å and 1.552 Å) bonds are stretched, indicating that the OCFGs sites on the surface of GO can effectively attract and activate HI molecules, among which the carbonyl site has the most substantial adsorption effect on HI.
Figs. S25 and S26 show that five GO models containing different OCFGs with a single-layer structure were established. In Fig. 13 , Fig. 14 , the HI molecular adsorption model shows that HI molecules are placed above the GO structures containing different OCFGs, and the corresponding calculation results of the adsorption energy are marked. The distances of the bond and between the atoms (unit: Å) during the adsorption process are shown in Tables S12–S16 . As shown in Fig. 13 , the adsorption energies ( E ads ) of HI molecules on structures containing –C–O–C– (epoxy group), –OH (hydroxyl group), and C = O (carbonyl group) on the GO surface are −0.76, −0.45 and −6.51 eV respectively. The HI molecules adsorbed on the surface of GO containing carbonyl group have the maximum adsorption energy, the H–I bond is broken, H contacts O on the carbonyl group to form a bond, and the distance between H and I from 1.650 Å increases to 2.506 Å, C = O undergoes double bond cleavage to form C–O, and the C–O bond is stretched to 1.471 Å. At the same time, during the adsorption process of HI molecules on the structure containing epoxy group and hydroxyl group on the GO surface, both the H–I (1.652 Å and 1.685 Å) and C–O (1.484 Å and 1.552 Å) bonds are stretched, indicating that the OCFGs sites on the surface of GO can effectively attract and activate HI molecules, among which the carbonyl site has the most substantial adsorption effect on HI.
In addition, Fig. 14 shows the adsorption process of HI molecules on the structure containing C = O (carbonyl group) and COOH (carboxyl group) at the edge of GO. Among them, C = O on the edge of GO has the largest adsorption energy of HI molecules ( E ads = -2.93 eV). The H–I bond is also broken, and H forms a bond after contact with the O of the edge carbonyl group. The distance between H and I atoms increases to 2.348 Å, suggesting that the carbonyl site on the edge of GO has a strong attraction and activation effect on HI. The COOH on the edge of GO has only −0.14 eV adsorption energy for HI molecules, suggesting that the carboxyl sites on the edge of GO make it difficult to attract HI molecules effectively. Therefore, it is evaluated that the carbonyl groups on the edge of GO have stronger adsorption capacity for HI molecules. In comparison, the carboxyl groups have weaker adsorption capacity for HI molecules.
The AIMD reduction reaction simulation of HI with GO containing different OCFGs was conducted at the actual reaction temperature of 90 °C to analyze the possible reduction pathway and mechanism. Fig. 15 shows a schematic diagram of HI’s reduction of GO containing the –OH groups. It can be observed that HI is adsorbed by the –OH group at 4.2 picoseconds (ps) and completes the reduction reaction to H 2 O and I* at 4.3 ps. The schematic diagram of the reduction of GO containing the –C–O–C– group by HI is shown in Fig. 16 . The reduction process of the epoxy group is divided into two steps, and the whole process consumes two molecules of HI. At 2.9 ps, the –C–O–C– group adsorbs the first HI, and at 3.0 ps, one of the C–O bonds is broken and bonds with H* in HI to form an intermediate –OH group. The further reduction of the –OH group by the second HI occurred around 40.7 ps, and the final products were H 2 O and two I*. Fig. 17 shows HI's reduction process of GO containing the C = O group. The reduction process of the C = O group also requires two steps. In a very short time of 0.101 ps, H* from HI was adsorbed by the C = O group, and at 0.117 ps, H* bonding with C = O groups generates –OH groups. Subsequently, at 12.8 ps, the –OH group was further reduced to generate H 2 O and two I*. The time required for the contact between HI and GO simulated by AIMD is consistent with the previous DFT adsorption energy results, indicating that HI can effectively reduce and remove OCFGs on the GO surface.
The AIMD reduction reaction simulation of HI with GO containing different OCFGs was conducted at the actual reaction temperature of 90 °C to analyze the possible reduction pathway and mechanism. Fig. 15 shows a schematic diagram of HI’s reduction of GO containing the –OH groups. It can be observed that HI is adsorbed by the –OH group at 4.2 picoseconds (ps) and completes the reduction reaction to H 2 O and I* at 4.3 ps. The schematic diagram of the reduction of GO containing the –C–O–C– group by HI is shown in Fig. 16 . The reduction process of the epoxy group is divided into two steps, and the whole process consumes two molecules of HI. At 2.9 ps, the –C–O–C– group adsorbs the first HI, and at 3.0 ps, one of the C–O bonds is broken and bonds with H* in HI to form an intermediate –OH group. The further reduction of the –OH group by the second HI occurred around 40.7 ps, and the final products were H 2 O and two I*. Fig. 17 shows HI's reduction process of GO containing the C = O group. The reduction process of the C = O group also requires two steps. In a very short time of 0.101 ps, H* from HI was adsorbed by the C = O group, and at 0.117 ps, H* bonding with C = O groups generates –OH groups. Subsequently, at 12.8 ps, the –OH group was further reduced to generate H 2 O and two I*. The time required for the contact between HI and GO simulated by AIMD is consistent with the previous DFT adsorption energy results, indicating that HI can effectively reduce and remove OCFGs on the GO surface.
The schematic diagram of the reduction of GO containing the C = O group on the edge by HI is shown in Fig. 18 . At 7.6 ps, the C = O group adsorbs the first HI and forms the intermediate product O-H. In the subsequent process, HI molecules continued to contact with the intermediate product O-H. The reaction time reached 36.8 ps, water molecules could still be generated to achieve the reduction of the GO edge carbonyl group. Fig. 19 shows a schematic diagram of HI reducing GO with COOH groups on the edge. Until the reaction time reached 45 ps, the HI molecules failed to form effective contact and adsorption with the COOH group during this process. According to the results of the AIMD simulation, the reducing agent HI has a weak reducing ability to the C = O groups and COOH groups on the edge of GO. This conclusion is consistent with the previous XPS spectrum results. In addition, during the AIMD simulation of HI reduction of GO, the carbon atoms on the GO surface were not eliminated during the reduction reaction, indicating that the process produced no defects and formed a relatively ordered rGO material. The previous Raman characterization showed that rGO with a higher degree of order was prepared, which is consistent with the simulation results. The video of the AIMD reduction reaction simulation of HI with GO containing different OCFGs process was given as Supporting Information Video 2 .
The schematic diagram of the reduction of GO containing the C = O group on the edge by HI is shown in Fig. 18 . At 7.6 ps, the C = O group adsorbs the first HI and forms the intermediate product O-H. In the subsequent process, HI molecules continued to contact with the intermediate product O-H. The reaction time reached 36.8 ps, water molecules could still be generated to achieve the reduction of the GO edge carbonyl group. Fig. 19 shows a schematic diagram of HI reducing GO with COOH groups on the edge. Until the reaction time reached 45 ps, the HI molecules failed to form effective contact and adsorption with the COOH group during this process. According to the results of the AIMD simulation, the reducing agent HI has a weak reducing ability to the C = O groups and COOH groups on the edge of GO. This conclusion is consistent with the previous XPS spectrum results. In addition, during the AIMD simulation of HI reduction of GO, the carbon atoms on the GO surface were not eliminated during the reduction reaction, indicating that the process produced no defects and formed a relatively ordered rGO material. The previous Raman characterization showed that rGO with a higher degree of order was prepared, which is consistent with the simulation results. The video of the AIMD reduction reaction simulation of HI with GO containing different OCFGs process was given as Supporting Information Video 2 .
The carbonyl group removes the H proton in HI during the adsorption process of HI and GO containing C = O. It generates the –OH group through a nucleophilic addition reaction , which is related to the extremely strong electronegative potential of the carbonyl group [18] . This step of the reaction process can be considered fast and occurs easily. However, in the AIMD simulation of OCFGs on the edge of GO, HI failed to effectively reduce them, so the calculation of the transition state of the above OCFGs was not performed. The structures containing –C–O–C– (epoxy group) and –OH (hydroxyl group) respectively on the GO surface, and reduced by HI to rGO, obtain the optimized structures and bond distances (in Å) of the intermediate and transition states are shown in Figs. S27 and S28 , the bond and inter-atom distance parameters during the reduction process are shown in Tables S17 and S18 . The calculated energy distribution of the free energy of the GO reduction process by HI is shown in Fig. S29 . As shown in Figs. S27 and S28 , first, GO containing –C–O–C– can be adsorbed and contacted with a HI molecular [G-COC + HI] to form an intermediate [G-COC···H*+I*] (G represents rGO) via TS (COC/OH). In TS (COC/OH), the original H1–I1 bond is broken to form H* and I*. The C1–O1 bond and C2–O1 bond on the GO surface were stretched from the original 1.484 Å to 1.539 Å and 1.709 Å, respectively, suggesting that the HI activated C–O bond in the epoxy group. The energy barrier of TS (COC/OH) is 8.85 Kcal/mol ( Fig. S29 ), indicating that the epoxy group is easily activated and reduced by H* and opens the ring to generate –OH. Subsequently, GO containing hydroxyl groups and another molecule of HI [G-OH + HI] were reduced through TS (OH/rGO) to obtain a molecule of water and rGO structure. It can be observed from Fig. S28 , the O1–H1 bond in GO attracts HI molecules [G···H-O-H + I*], which in turn breaks the H2–I2 bond in HI to generate H* and I*, forming H1–O1–H2 bonds [G···H-O-H + I*]. At the same time, the C1-O1 bond (1.552 Å) breaks, and the distance between C1 and O1 atoms increases to 2.925 Å [TS (OH/rGO)], suggesting that the C1–O1 bond on the GO surface is activated by H*. It is worth noting that, as shown in Fig. S28 , the O1–H2 bond in [TS (OH/rGO)] has a bond length of 0.983 Å, which is very close to the O1–H2 bond length of water molecular in [G + H2O + I*] (0.991 Å), suggesting that the O1–H2 bond has a stable structure. In addition, as shown in Fig. S29 , the energy barrier of TS (OH/rGO) is 10.07 Kcal/mol, indicating that HI also easily reduces hydroxyl groups. Scheme 2 shows that the possible pathways for GO containing different OCFGs are reduced by HI.
The carbonyl group removes the H proton in HI during the adsorption process of HI and GO containing C = O. It generates the –OH group through a nucleophilic addition reaction , which is related to the extremely strong electronegative potential of the carbonyl group [18] . This step of the reaction process can be considered fast and occurs easily. However, in the AIMD simulation of OCFGs on the edge of GO, HI failed to effectively reduce them, so the calculation of the transition state of the above OCFGs was not performed. The structures containing –C–O–C– (epoxy group) and –OH (hydroxyl group) respectively on the GO surface, and reduced by HI to rGO, obtain the optimized structures and bond distances (in Å) of the intermediate and transition states are shown in Figs. S27 and S28 , the bond and inter-atom distance parameters during the reduction process are shown in Tables S17 and S18 . The calculated energy distribution of the free energy of the GO reduction process by HI is shown in Fig. S29 . As shown in Figs. S27 and S28 , first, GO containing –C–O–C– can be adsorbed and contacted with a HI molecular [G-COC + HI] to form an intermediate [G-COC···H*+I*] (G represents rGO) via TS (COC/OH). In TS (COC/OH), the original H1–I1 bond is broken to form H* and I*. The C1–O1 bond and C2–O1 bond on the GO surface were stretched from the original 1.484 Å to 1.539 Å and 1.709 Å, respectively, suggesting that the HI activated C–O bond in the epoxy group. The energy barrier of TS (COC/OH) is 8.85 Kcal/mol ( Fig. S29 ), indicating that the epoxy group is easily activated and reduced by H* and opens the ring to generate –OH. Subsequently, GO containing hydroxyl groups and another molecule of HI [G-OH + HI] were reduced through TS (OH/rGO) to obtain a molecule of water and rGO structure. It can be observed from Fig. S28 , the O1–H1 bond in GO attracts HI molecules [G···H-O-H + I*], which in turn breaks the H2–I2 bond in HI to generate H* and I*, forming H1–O1–H2 bonds [G···H-O-H + I*]. At the same time, the C1-O1 bond (1.552 Å) breaks, and the distance between C1 and O1 atoms increases to 2.925 Å [TS (OH/rGO)], suggesting that the C1–O1 bond on the GO surface is activated by H*. It is worth noting that, as shown in Fig. S28 , the O1–H2 bond in [TS (OH/rGO)] has a bond length of 0.983 Å, which is very close to the O1–H2 bond length of water molecular in [G + H2O + I*] (0.991 Å), suggesting that the O1–H2 bond has a stable structure. In addition, as shown in Fig. S29 , the energy barrier of TS (OH/rGO) is 10.07 Kcal/mol, indicating that HI also easily reduces hydroxyl groups. Scheme 2 shows that the possible pathways for GO containing different OCFGs are reduced by HI.

## 4. Conclusions

In summary, we report a metal-free, transfer-free, fully scalable, rapid, and low-temperature novel technology to coat GO on any rigid, flexible substrates or current collector in ambient air with simultaneous one-step reduction to rGO thin films. This method is a simple and fast spray preparation method of rGO under a hydroiodic acid reducing atmosphere, which can be widely used in flexible electronic devices and SCs. The transmittance of the rGO thin film can be easily controlled by adjusting the spraying time or the concentration of the GO dispersion, and the degree of reduction of rGO can be controlled by adjusting the amount of HI, resulting in a larger specific capacitance. In addition, DFT calculations revealed the adsorption capacity of GO containing different OCFGs to HI during the reduction process, among which the carbonyl group (C = O) has the strongest adsorption capacity for HI. Optimization of the transition state confirmed the lower reaction energy barrier exhibited throughout the reduction process. AIMD was used to simulate the possible process of GO reduction by HI, which provided possible theoretical guidance for the reduction mechanism of GO containing different OCFGs in the HI reducing agent environment. The prepared flexible transparent conductive film rGO/PET 0.2 mL HI exhibits a conductivity below 1000 Ω/sq and a transparency of 80 %. The prepared rGO/CC 0.03 mL HI was applied in SCs, and high specific capacitance of 433.2 F/g at 5 mV/s. The capacity retention rate after 20,000 times charge and discharge cycles is 93.26 %. This process is the first to simultaneously reduce GO and form a thin film on a flexible substrate or current collector, developing a fast, low-toxic, and environmentally friendly path to produce rGO thin films. Our study not only validates the efficacy of the one-step synthesis method for rGO thin films but also provides theoretical insights into the underlying reaction mechanism. This work holds significant promise for advancing applications in various electronics by facilitating large-scale production of high-quality rGO thin films.

## Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts to declare.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Fangbo Yao: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Formal analysis, Data curation. Wenruo Li: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Formal analysis, Data curation. Saravana Karthikeyan SKS: Data curation. Choji Fukuhara: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Investigation. Sushmee Badhulika: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Investigation. Chang Yi Kong: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Investigation.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements

The FT-IR, XRD, TGA, Raman, STEM, FE-SEM, and XPS measurements were carried out at Hamamatsu Campus Center for Instrumental Analysis, Shizuoka University. The authors are grateful to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan for grant-in-aid for scientific research 23H00530 and 24K03118 for financial support. The authors also thank the Tokai Industrial Technology Promotion Foundation and Amano Institute of Technology research grants, Japan for financial support.

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Media player Play Restart Rewind Forward Volume 70% Slower Faster Preferences Enter full screen Captions Descriptions Keyboard Transcript 0:00 / 1:17 Speed: 1x Paused Download: Download video (5MB) Supplementary video 2 .

### Media player

- Captions
- Descriptions
- Keyboard
- Transcript
Supplementary video 2 .
Media player Play Restart Rewind Forward Volume 70% Slower Faster Preferences Enter full screen Captions Descriptions Keyboard Transcript 0:00 / 1:39 Speed: 1x Paused Download: Download video (3MB) Supplementary video 3 .

### Media player

- Captions
- Descriptions
- Keyboard
- Transcript
Supplementary video 3 .
Download: Download Word document (23MB) Supplementary data 1 .
Supplementary data 1 .