## Abstract

This paper examines how varying the thickness of the indium tin oxide (ITO) seed layer, ranging from 8 to 20 nm, impacts the optical, electrical, and structural properties of triple-layer transparent conductive oxide ITO/aluminum doped zinc oxide (AZO)/ITO. ITO and AZO films were deposited by DC and RF magnetron sputtering , respectively. The thickness and density of each layer were measured by X-ray reflectometry (XRR). X-ray diffraction showed that as the thickness of the ITO seed layer increased, both the average size of the crystallites and the volume of the crystalline phase in the AZO film also increased. Measurements of the electrical characteristics indicated a decrease in resistivity as the thickness of the ITO seed layer increased. This reduction is attributed to enhanced charge mobility, resulting from improved crystallinity . It has been shown that a 20-nm-thick ITO seed layer is sufficient to achieve a charge mobility comparable to that of pure ITO films. The photoluminescence spectra have shown a decrease in the concentration of the oxygen vacancies with the introduction of both the cover and seed layers of ITO. The figure of merits (FOM) of the triple-layer coatings and the optical constants of the AZO and ITO films were calculated. The results of this paper indicate that the ITO20/AZO48/ITO12 triple-layer coating possesses optimal characteristics for use in high-efficiency silicon solar cells .

## 1. Introduction

Transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) play a crucial role across various sectors of industry. In recent years, considerable attention has been paid to TCO films in photovoltaic cells [ [1] , [2] , [3] ]. Due to their high transparency and suitable optical properties , TCO films serve as effective antireflection coatings . Additionally, their high conductivity facilitates the efficient collection of charges generated within the active zone of a solar cell. Therefore, TCO films have been used in almost all types of solar cells with record efficiency. For instance, LONGi managed to achieve an efficiency of 26.81 % based on a silicon heterojunction technology (HJT) solar cell, using a modified TCO coating on both sides [ 4 ]. Y. Zhao et al. [ 5 ] managed to achieve a certified efficiency of 25.6 % based on perovskite solar cell using fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass. M. Nakamura et al. [ 6 ] achieved an efficiency of 23.35 % based on a cadmium-free Cu(In,Ga)Se 2 (CIGS) solar cell using ZnO:B transparent oxide. Thus, TCO films play pivotal role in the technologies for the production of next generation solar cells.
TCO films based on indium are currently the most extensively studied and possess the best electrical and optical properties. However, the scarcity of indium and its high-cost pose limitations on the large-scale manufacture of high-efficiency solar cells. Given these challenges, there is a pressing need for alternative materials that offer low cost and suitable physical characteristics. Materials based on zinc oxide are a promising alternative. However, intrinsically conductive ZnO has a relatively low charge concentration and, as a result, lower conductivity. To increase the electrical conductivity , zinc oxide can be doped with 3A block elements like boron or aluminum .
Aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) presents high conductivity and transparency, positioning it a promising competitor to ITO . AZO films can be fabricated by various deposition techniques, including chemical vapor deposition , sol-gel method, magnetron sputtering , etc. Table 1 shows the main results on the synthesis of AZO films. Nevertheless, magnetron sputtering has emerged as the preferred choice due to its versatility, the high quality of the resulting films, and scalability for industrial production [ 7 ]. Table 1 . The deposition of AZO thin films by various techniques, along with the electrical, optical and structural properties.
Aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) presents high conductivity and transparency, positioning it a promising competitor to ITO . AZO films can be fabricated by various deposition techniques, including chemical vapor deposition , sol-gel method, magnetron sputtering , etc. Table 1 shows the main results on the synthesis of AZO films. Nevertheless, magnetron sputtering has emerged as the preferred choice due to its versatility, the high quality of the resulting films, and scalability for industrial production [ 7 ].
Table 1 . The deposition of AZO thin films by various techniques, along with the electrical, optical and structural properties.
Despite the excellent physical properties, the widespread use of AZO films is limited by two main aspects, which are well described in the work of Tang et al. [ 2 ]. First, at small thicknesses (<100 nm), AZO films have an order of magnitude higher electrical resistivity compared to ITO films due to the amorphous-like structure at the film–substrate interface. Secondly, AZO films have a low stability of electrical properties due to the penetration of oxygen into oxygen vacancies , which are a source of free electrons [ 16 ]. These problems of AZO films can be solved by introducing a seed and protective layer. For example, Shen et al. [ 16 ] synthesized a double-layer TCO coating and showed that the ITO protective layer can effectively prevent the penetration of oxygen into the AZO film. Wang et al. [ 17 ] synthesized multilayer ITO/AZO coatings to increase the conductivity of thin films . Rezaie et al. [ 18 ] synthesized double-layer ITO/AZO and ITO/ZnO coatings and showed an improvement in optoelectrical properties. Tang et al. [ 2 ] synthesized ITO/AZO/ITO triple-layer coatings for heterojunction solar cells and showed an effective reduction in the consumption of indium used for high-efficiency heterojunction silicon solar cells .
In this work, we study the effect of the thickness of the ITO seed layer synthesized by magnetron sputtering on the structural, optical, and electrical properties of ITO/AZO/ITO triple-layer coatings.

## 2. Experimental details


### 2.1. Materials and methods

Thin triple-layer ITO-AZO-ITO coatings were deposited on polished (100) n-type silicon featuring a resistivity of 22.9 Ω cm, an area of 12 cm 2 and a thickness of ∼400 μm. Additionally, thin films were deposited on cover microscopic glass slides with a thickness of ∼170 μm and an area of 18 × 18 mm 2 (ISOLAB). Before thin film deposition , all samples were cleaned by the Radio Corporation of America (RCA) method. ITO and AZO films were deposited using a MAGNA-TM200-1 magnetron setup. Before the sputtering process, a base pressure of 5 × 10 −4 Pa was achieved in the vacuum chamber using dry rotary and turbomolecular pumps. The ITO layers were obtained in an Ar and O 2 atmosphere. The O 2 flow (99.999 %) was set to 0.75 sccm (2.6 %) and the Ar flow (99.999 %) was adjusted so that the total pressure inside the chamber was 0.67 Pa. The ITO films were deposited at a power of 250 W in direct current (DC) mode, utilizing a cylindrical ITO target measuring 100 mm in diameter (supplied by Kurt J. Lesker). Immediately following the deposition of the ITO layer, AZO layers were deposited in an Ar atmosphere at a pressure of 0.7 Pa and a radio frequency (RF) power of 300 W. The AZO layers were obtained from cylindrical targets with a diameter of 100 mm (supplied by Girmet). The distance between the substrate and the target was constant and set to 90 mm. A schematic representation of the sputtering process is shown in Fig. 1 a. For uniform deposition, the substrate holder during sputtering process was rotated. The film thickness was varied by changing the deposition time. The samples were not additionally heated during the process, but an increase in the substrate temperature during AZO deposition up to 40 °C was recorded.
Thin triple-layer ITO-AZO-ITO coatings were deposited on polished (100) n-type silicon featuring a resistivity of 22.9 Ω cm, an area of 12 cm 2 and a thickness of ∼400 μm. Additionally, thin films were deposited on cover microscopic glass slides with a thickness of ∼170 μm and an area of 18 × 18 mm 2 (ISOLAB). Before thin film deposition , all samples were cleaned by the Radio Corporation of America (RCA) method. ITO and AZO films were deposited using a MAGNA-TM200-1 magnetron setup. Before the sputtering process, a base pressure of 5 × 10 −4 Pa was achieved in the vacuum chamber using dry rotary and turbomolecular pumps. The ITO layers were obtained in an Ar and O 2 atmosphere. The O 2 flow (99.999 %) was set to 0.75 sccm (2.6 %) and the Ar flow (99.999 %) was adjusted so that the total pressure inside the chamber was 0.67 Pa. The ITO films were deposited at a power of 250 W in direct current (DC) mode, utilizing a cylindrical ITO target measuring 100 mm in diameter (supplied by Kurt J. Lesker). Immediately following the deposition of the ITO layer, AZO layers were deposited in an Ar atmosphere at a pressure of 0.7 Pa and a radio frequency (RF) power of 300 W. The AZO layers were obtained from cylindrical targets with a diameter of 100 mm (supplied by Girmet). The distance between the substrate and the target was constant and set to 90 mm. A schematic representation of the sputtering process is shown in Fig. 1 a. For uniform deposition, the substrate holder during sputtering process was rotated. The film thickness was varied by changing the deposition time. The samples were not additionally heated during the process, but an increase in the substrate temperature during AZO deposition up to 40 °C was recorded.

### 2.2. Characterization

The density and thickness of the films were measured by X-ray reflectometry (XRR) using a ComplexRay C6 setup with a Cu-K α X-ray source (wavelength of 0.154 nm). The measurements were carried out in the Θ-2Θ mode with a step of 0.001° and 0.002°, respectively [ 19 ]. The obtained curves were analyzed using the GenX software by fitting the theoretical and experimental curves. X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra were also obtained on a ComplexRay C6 setup in the GIXRD mode. The transmittance spectrum was measured in the range from 300 nm to 1100 nm on an Evolution UV–Vis 300 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific™) with a xenon lamp as the radiation source. Optical constants were obtained using the transmission spectra and the SCOUT software [ 20 , 21 ]. Electrical resistivity, mobility, and charge concentration were measured by the Van der Pauw method using a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit (SMU). Photoluminescence measurements were made at room temperature on a Lumina fluorescence spectrometer. The excitation source was a 150-W xenon lamp with an excitation wavelength of 330 nm. Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) software was used to simulate oxygen penetration in AZO film during the ITO sputtering process [ 22 ]. In all simulations, 10,000 ions were simulated to obtain a relatively accurate picture of possible distribution in the sample. Detailed parameters of the simulations are presented in Table 2 . Table 2 . Detailed parameters of the simulations by SRIM software.
The density and thickness of the films were measured by X-ray reflectometry (XRR) using a ComplexRay C6 setup with a Cu-K α X-ray source (wavelength of 0.154 nm). The measurements were carried out in the Θ-2Θ mode with a step of 0.001° and 0.002°, respectively [ 19 ]. The obtained curves were analyzed using the GenX software by fitting the theoretical and experimental curves. X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra were also obtained on a ComplexRay C6 setup in the GIXRD mode. The transmittance spectrum was measured in the range from 300 nm to 1100 nm on an Evolution UV–Vis 300 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific™) with a xenon lamp as the radiation source. Optical constants were obtained using the transmission spectra and the SCOUT software [ 20 , 21 ]. Electrical resistivity, mobility, and charge concentration were measured by the Van der Pauw method using a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit (SMU). Photoluminescence measurements were made at room temperature on a Lumina fluorescence spectrometer. The excitation source was a 150-W xenon lamp with an excitation wavelength of 330 nm. Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) software was used to simulate oxygen penetration in AZO film during the ITO sputtering process [ 22 ]. In all simulations, 10,000 ions were simulated to obtain a relatively accurate picture of possible distribution in the sample. Detailed parameters of the simulations are presented in Table 2 .
Table 2 . Detailed parameters of the simulations by SRIM software.

## 3. Results and discussions

Fig. 1 b shows the measured XRR spectra. Kiessig fringes [ 21 , 23 ] superimposed on each other from different layers are visible in all spectra. The total thickness of the triple-layer coating does not exceed 80 nm, which is optimal for efficient reflection reduction from a silicon surface [ 7 , 24 ]. The thickness of the ITO seed layer varies from 8 to 20 nm, while the protective layer measures from 8 to 12 nm. A schematic representation of the resulting structure is shown in Fig. 1 c. According to the obtained results, the density of the AZO films is close to the bulk values of ZnO (5.61 g/cm 3 ) and varies from 5.4 to 5.58 g/cm 3 . However, the density of both ITO layers is much lower than the table value of 7.12 g/cm 3 and varies from 5.77 g/cm 3 to 6.68 g/cm 3 . A reduced density (6.76 g/cm3) was also observed for a single layer ITO coating with a thickness of 56 nm (not shown). This reduction in density can be attributed to the relatively small thickness of the film [ 25 ].
Fig. 2 a shows the resulting XRD spectra. All spectra obtained from coatings with nearly identical thickness of the AZO layer exhibit a strong peak at 2θ ≈ 34.4°, and a weak peak at ≈62.8°. These peaks can be attributed to reflections from the systems of (002) and (103) planes, respectively, for the wurtzite-type hexagonal system of ZnO [ 16 ]. It can be seen that with an increase in the thickness of the ITO layer from 8 to 20 nm, the intensity of the ZnO (002) peak increases significantly, which indicates an improvement in the crystallinity of the AZO films. Being that the integrated intensity of the peak is usually proportional to the volume of the crystalline phase, an increase in which at an equal layer thickness indicates an increase in crystallinity. In addition, the intensity of the (002) peak significantly increases by 70 % for a single-layer AZO coating with a thickness of 72 nm on silicon. This is attributed to a ∼40 % increase in thickness compared to the ITO8/AZO52/ITO8 coating and an enhancement in the crystallinity of the AZO films as the thickness increases [ 26 ]. The volume of the ZnO crystalline phase in the AZO50 layer on the surface of the ITO15 seed layer is only 3 % lower than the volume of the ZnO crystalline phase in the AZO72 layer on the silicon surface. Consequently, it suggests that the AZO72 layer contains an amorphous phase, constituting at least 28 % of the volume. This amorphous part transforms into ZnO crystallites when deposited on the ITO seed layer instead of the c-Si/SiOx surface. Thus, the observation of accelerated solid-phase crystallization of the AZO layer during deposition on the ITO surface is noted. Earlier studies have reported a similar ITO-assisted crystalline AZO growth phenomenon attributed to the small lattice mismatch between the neighboring oxygen-oxygen distance on the closest-packed planes of bixbyite In 2 O 3 and ZnO [ 16 ].
As depicted in Fig. 2 b, the effect of crystallization acceleration seems to depend on the thickness of the ITO seed layer within the 8–20 nm range, suggesting a likely dependence on the quality of the ITO-AZO transition layer structure. The quality of the transition layer undergoes alterations with an increase in the ITO thickness on silicon likely due to surface self-organization processes occurring during deposition.
As depicted in Fig. 2 b, the effect of crystallization acceleration seems to depend on the thickness of the ITO seed layer within the 8–20 nm range, suggesting a likely dependence on the quality of the ITO-AZO transition layer structure. The quality of the transition layer undergoes alterations with an increase in the ITO thickness on silicon likely due to surface self-organization processes occurring during deposition.
As is known, the electrical properties of ZnO films largely depend on the average crystallite size . Therefore, based on the obtained XRD spectra and half-width of the (002) peak average crystallite sizes were determined according to the Scherrer equation [ 27 , 28 ]: (1) D = K λ β cos θ where. D – the average crystallite size, λ – the X-ray wavelength (0.154 nm), β – the line width at half maximum (FWHM), θ – the Bragg angle , K – dimensionless shape factor.
- D – the average crystallite size,
D – the average crystallite size,
- λ – the X-ray wavelength (0.154 nm),
λ – the X-ray wavelength (0.154 nm),
- β – the line width at half maximum (FWHM),
β – the line width at half maximum (FWHM),
- θ – the Bragg angle ,
θ – the Bragg angle ,
- K – dimensionless shape factor.
K – dimensionless shape factor.
As illustrated in Fig. 2 b, the sizes of ZnO crystallites (∼13.8 nm) are almost equal in the AZO layers on the c-Si surface and on the surface of the 8-nm-thick ITO seed layer. This suggests that there are no self-organization effects in the ITO8 layers, which would substantially impact the processes of AZO crystallization. Moreover, a noticeable trend is the shift of the ZnO (002) peak towards smaller 2θ angles as the thickness of the ITO seed layer decreases (insert in Fig. 2 a). According to the Bragg equation, a shift of the peak to smaller 2θ angles indicates an increase in d-spacing and expansion of the ZnO lattice. Therefore, if the thickness of the ITO seed layer is insufficient (e.g., in an ITO8/AZO52/ITO8 coating), the AZO layer forms with a lower degree of perfection [ 28 ] and ITO seed layer, does not exert any positive influence [ 29 ].
In contrast to ITO8/AZO52/ITO8 structure, when the thickness of the ITO layer is increased to 12 and 15 nm, the size of AZO nanocrystals increases from 13.8 to 14.7 and 15.2 nm, and further, to 18.8 nm for ITO20. An increase in the average size of crystallites in the presence of an ITO seed layer was recorded previously [ 2 , 30 ]. In this case, the integrated intensity of the ZnO (002) peak (the volume of the nanocrystalline phase) increases much faster than the volume of the average crystallite. This indicates the intensive formation of new crystallites within the amorphous part and signifies an improvement in the crystallinity of the layer. A subsequent increase in the thickness of the ITO layer to 20 nm led to an accelerated increase in the size of ZnO nanocrystals, but there was no concurrent increase in the volume of the nanocrystalline phase. Moreover, the decrease in the integrated intensity exceeds the expected values due to the decrease in thickness from 50 to 48 nm, i.e. amorphous regions are still present in AZO.
Fig. 3 a represents the electrical properties of the deposited multilayer films . For comparison, the electrical properties of 72 nm thick AZO films are also provided. It is evident that incorporation of a thin ITO layer enables a reduction the electrical resistivity of the films, even with a thinner AZO layer. This is primarily due to an increase in the charge mobility from 9.56 cm 2 V −1 s −1 for pure AZO to 41.34 cm 2 V −1 s −1 for the ITO12/AZO48/ITO20 structure, which correlates with the X-ray diffraction results. It's worth noting that the charge mobility of the pure ITO56 films we obtained does not exceed 42 cm 2 V −1 s −1 (not depicted). Therefore, it can be inferred that further increasing the thickness of the ITO layer will unlikely result in an increase in the charge mobility. Nevertheless, the charge concentration sharply decreases with the introduction of even 8 nm seed and cover ITO layers from 2.31 × 10 20 to 1.48 × 10 20 cm −3 and remains practically unchanged with a further increase in the thickness of the ITO layers. This decline in concentration can be associated with the deposition process and the presence of oxygen in the chamber during the deposition of ITO films. Indeed, during the sputtering process for depositing ITO films, high-energy negative oxygen ions are formed near the target surface, reaching energies of up to 400 eV [ 31 ]. These ions can penetrate into the AZO film and compensate oxygen vacancies in the lattice, which reduces the total concentration of free electrons in the film. This explains the comparable values of charge carrier concentrations for the structures with seed and cover ITO layers, regardless of their differing thicknesses. Certainly, according to SRIM software [ 21 ] oxygen ions with an energy of 400 eV penetrate deep into the AZO films by no more than 60 Å ( Fig. 3 b). However, as the ITO film grows, the amount of oxygen ions reaching the AZO film decreases sharply ( Fig. 3 (с-e)). Moreover, once the ITO thickness exceeds 6 nm, oxygen ions are unable to penetrate into the AZO layer anymore.
Fig. 3 a represents the electrical properties of the deposited multilayer films . For comparison, the electrical properties of 72 nm thick AZO films are also provided. It is evident that incorporation of a thin ITO layer enables a reduction the electrical resistivity of the films, even with a thinner AZO layer. This is primarily due to an increase in the charge mobility from 9.56 cm 2 V −1 s −1 for pure AZO to 41.34 cm 2 V −1 s −1 for the ITO12/AZO48/ITO20 structure, which correlates with the X-ray diffraction results. It's worth noting that the charge mobility of the pure ITO56 films we obtained does not exceed 42 cm 2 V −1 s −1 (not depicted). Therefore, it can be inferred that further increasing the thickness of the ITO layer will unlikely result in an increase in the charge mobility. Nevertheless, the charge concentration sharply decreases with the introduction of even 8 nm seed and cover ITO layers from 2.31 × 10 20 to 1.48 × 10 20 cm −3 and remains practically unchanged with a further increase in the thickness of the ITO layers. This decline in concentration can be associated with the deposition process and the presence of oxygen in the chamber during the deposition of ITO films. Indeed, during the sputtering process for depositing ITO films, high-energy negative oxygen ions are formed near the target surface, reaching energies of up to 400 eV [ 31 ]. These ions can penetrate into the AZO film and compensate oxygen vacancies in the lattice, which reduces the total concentration of free electrons in the film. This explains the comparable values of charge carrier concentrations for the structures with seed and cover ITO layers, regardless of their differing thicknesses. Certainly, according to SRIM software [ 21 ] oxygen ions with an energy of 400 eV penetrate deep into the AZO films by no more than 60 Å ( Fig. 3 b). However, as the ITO film grows, the amount of oxygen ions reaching the AZO film decreases sharply ( Fig. 3 (с-e)). Moreover, once the ITO thickness exceeds 6 nm, oxygen ions are unable to penetrate into the AZO layer anymore.
Fig. 4 a shows the photoluminescence spectra for the AZO and ITO12/AZO52/ITO12 samples in the 350–550 nm region. In both spectra several emission peaks centered at 372, 418, 440, 463, 474 nm can be observed. However, the emission intensity for the ITO 12/AZO 52/ITO 12 sample appears lower, possibly due to the smaller thickness of the AZO layer or partial absorption in the ITO cover layer. UV radiation at 372 nm (3.34 eV) is typical of ZnO films and is associated with near band edge emission (NBE) [ 32 ]. Strong violet radiation centered at 418 nm (2.97 eV) is associated with an electronic transition from the bottom of the conduction band to the zinc interstitial (Zn i ) level [ 33 ]. Strong blue emission centered at 440 nm (2.82 eV) is associated with the transition from ionized Zn i interstitial levels to the upper level of the valence band [ 33 ]. Another blue emission with a peak at 463 nm (2.68 eV) is associated with the transition from shallow donor levels of the oxygen vacancy to the valence band [ 34 ]. Hence the intensity of this peak can be used to judge the concentration of oxygen vacancies in AZO films. An emission peak at 474 nm (2.62 eV) is also seen, it is associated with the recombination of electrons from the conduction band with holes, on ionized zinc vacancies [ 33 ].
Fig. 4 a shows the photoluminescence spectra for the AZO and ITO12/AZO52/ITO12 samples in the 350–550 nm region. In both spectra several emission peaks centered at 372, 418, 440, 463, 474 nm can be observed. However, the emission intensity for the ITO 12/AZO 52/ITO 12 sample appears lower, possibly due to the smaller thickness of the AZO layer or partial absorption in the ITO cover layer. UV radiation at 372 nm (3.34 eV) is typical of ZnO films and is associated with near band edge emission (NBE) [ 32 ]. Strong violet radiation centered at 418 nm (2.97 eV) is associated with an electronic transition from the bottom of the conduction band to the zinc interstitial (Zn i ) level [ 33 ]. Strong blue emission centered at 440 nm (2.82 eV) is associated with the transition from ionized Zn i interstitial levels to the upper level of the valence band [ 33 ]. Another blue emission with a peak at 463 nm (2.68 eV) is associated with the transition from shallow donor levels of the oxygen vacancy to the valence band [ 34 ]. Hence the intensity of this peak can be used to judge the concentration of oxygen vacancies in AZO films. An emission peak at 474 nm (2.62 eV) is also seen, it is associated with the recombination of electrons from the conduction band with holes, on ionized zinc vacancies [ 33 ].
To estimate the concentration of oxygen vacancies, the luminescence spectra were deconvoluted, the area of each peak was measured, and the proportion of the peak at 463 nm (2.68 eV) relative to the rest was measured according to equation (2) : (2) f 463 = A 463 A 418 + A 440 + A 463 + A 474
The deconvoluted luminescence spectra for the AZO and ITO 12/AZO 52/ITO 12 samples are shown in Fig. 4 b and c. According to equation (2) , the fraction of the 463 nm peak decreases from 0.05 to 0.04 with the introduction of the ITO layers, which may explain the decrease in the charge concentration ( Fig. 3 ).
Fig. 5 a shows the transmittance spectra of AZO film, glass and triple-layer ITO/AZO/ITO coatings. The transparency of all triple-layer coatings is more than 78 % in the range of 400–1100 nm.
Fig. 5 a shows the transmittance spectra of AZO film, glass and triple-layer ITO/AZO/ITO coatings. The transparency of all triple-layer coatings is more than 78 % in the range of 400–1100 nm.
To quantify and compare the performance of different TCO coatings in terms of transparency and electrical resistivity Haacke proposed a revised equation for calculation of the figure of merit (FOM) [ 35 ]: (3) Φ T C = T a v g 10 R s where. T avg is the average value of transparency in the range of 400–800 nm, R s is surface resistance.
- T avg is the average value of transparency in the range of 400–800 nm,
T avg is the average value of transparency in the range of 400–800 nm,
- R s is surface resistance.
R s is surface resistance.
Sheet resistance (R s ) is obtained from the below-given equation: (4) R S = ρ t where. ρ is resistivity, t is the coating thickness.
- ρ is resistivity,
ρ is resistivity,
- t is the coating thickness.
t is the coating thickness.
The resulting FOM plot ( Fig. 5 b) demonstrates that as the ITO content increase, the properties of the TCO films improve, primarily attributed to a reduction in resistance ( Fig. 3 ). The best properties are obtained for sample ITO20/AZO48/ITO12, where FOM is 9.13 ·10 −4 □·Ω −1 and corresponds to the standard value of 10 −4 □·Ω −1 [ 14 ]. Fig. 5 c presents the optical constants of the AZO and ITO films derived from the transmission spectra of the single layer coatings and the SCOUT software. The obtained results are traditional for AZO and ITO films synthesized by magnetron sputtering [ [36] , [37] , [38] ]. It can also be observed that the extinction coefficient of ITO films is higher over the entire spectrum under consideration, which indicates lower transparency. From this it follows that replacement of 60–76 % of the thickness of the ITO coating with AZO improves transmittance in the region of 350–1100 nm, especially in the visible region of 380–740 nm.

## 4. Conclusion

The effect of the thickness of the ITO seed layer on the optical, electrical, and structural properties of triple-layer ITO/AZO/ITO TCO coatings has been studied. It is shown that an increase in the ITO seed layer thickness to 20 nm leads to an improvement in crystallinity and an increase in the average crystallite size in an AZO film from 13.8 to 18.8 nm. However, introduction of even an 8-nm ITO seed layer makes it possible to reduce the electrical resistivity and increase the charge mobility of the TCO layer. Moreover, the 20 nm thick ITO seed layer makes it possible to increase the charge mobility from 9.56 cm 2 V −1 s −1 for pure AZO to 41.34 cm 2 V −1 s −1 for the ITO12/AZO48/ITO20 film. The deconvolution of the luminescence spectra showed a decrease in the fraction of the 463 nm peak from 0.05 to 0.04 upon the introduction of ITO layers, which may indicate a decrease in the concentration of oxygen vacancies in the AZO layer. UV–visible spectrophotometry showed the transmittance of all triple-layer coatings is more than 78 % in the range of 400–1100 nm. The ITO12/AZO48/ITO20 layer has the best FOM and is 9.13 10 −4 □ Ω −1 . The calculation of optical constants showed that AZO films are more transparent than ITO, which means that replacing 60–76 % of the ITO coating thickness with AZO improves transparency in the 350–1100 nm region.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Assanali Sultanov: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Conceptualization. Ilya Zhirkov: Investigation. Kair Nussupov: Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Aizhan Kusainova: Investigation. Nuriya Abdyldayeva: Methodology. Nurzhan Beisenkhanov: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:Assanali Sultanov reports financial support was provided by Committee of Science of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Nurzhan Beisenkhanov reports financial support was provided by Committee of Science of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Kair Nussupov reports financial support was provided by Committee of Science of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Aizhan Kusainova reports financial support was provided by Committee of Science of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Nuriya Abdyldayeva reports financial support was provided by Committee of Science of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Nurzhan Beisenkhanov reports financial support was provided by Сommittee of Science of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Nurzhan Beisenkhanov, Kair Nussupov reports a relationship with Committee of Science of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan that includes: funding grants.

## Acknowledgments

This research has been funded by the Committee of Science of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan (Grant No. AP14870185)